Copyright 2007 by ABC-CLIO

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored
in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, except for the inclusion of brief
quotations in a review, without prior permission in writing from the publishers.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Fontenoy, Paul E.
Submarines : an illustrated history of their impact / Paul E. Fontenoy.
p.     cm. — (Encyclopedias of weapons and warfare series)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-1-85109-563-6 (hard cover : alk. paper)
ISBN-13: 978-1-85109-568-1 (ebook)
1. Submarines (Ships)—History. I. Title.

V857.F65 2007
359.9'3—dc22
2006039316

11 10 09 08 07 / 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook.
Visit abc-clio.com for details.

ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911

Senior Production Editor, Cami Cacciatore
Editorial Assistant, Sara Springer
Production Manager, Don Schmidt
Media Manager, Caroline Price
Media Editor, J. R. Withers
File Management Coordinator, Paula Gerard

This book is printed on acid-free paper.
Manufactured in the United States of AmericaC O N T E N T S

Introduction to Weapons and Warfare Series,
Spencer C. Tucker vii
Preface ix

chapter one

Early Submarines 1

chapter two

A War-Winning Weapon? 23

chapter three

The Advent of True Submarines 39

chapter four

Strategic Missile Submarines 53

submarines of the world

Pioneers 65
Submarine Builders 67
Early Submarines 75
A War-Winning Weapon? 181
The Advent of True Submarines 313
Strategic Missile Submarines 401

vvi C O N T E N T S

Glossary 425
Bibliography 429
Index 439
About the Author 449I N T R O D U C T I O N T O
W E A P O N S A N D WA R FA R E S E R I E S

Weapons both fascinate and repel. They are used to kill and
maim individuals and to destroy states and societies, and occasion-
ally whole civilizations, and with these the greatest of man’s cultural
and artistic accomplishments. Throughout history tools of war have
been the instruments of conquest, invasion, and enslavement, but
they have also been used to check evil and to maintain peace.
Weapons have evolved over time to become both more lethal and
more complex. For the greater part of human existence, combat was
fought at the length of an arm or at such short range as to represent
no real difference; battle was fought within line of sight and seldom
lasted more than the hours of daylight of a single day. Thus individ-
ual weapons that began with the rock and the club proceeded
through the sling and boomerang, bow and arrow, sword and axe, to
gunpowder weapons of the riﬂe and machine gun of the late nine-
teenth century. Study of the evolution of these weapons tells us
much about human ingenuity, the technology of the time, and the
societies that produced them. The greater part of technological de-
velopment of weaponry has taken part in the last two centuries, es-
pecially the twentieth century. In this process, plowshares have been
beaten into swords; the tank, for example, evolved from the agricul-
tural caterpillar tractor. Occasionally, the process is reversed and
military technology has impacted society in a positive way. Thus
modern civilian medicine has greatly benefited from advances to
save soldiers’ lives, and weapons technology has impacted such areas
as civilian transportation or atomic power.
Weapons can have a profound impact on society. Gunpowder
weapons, for example, were an important factor in ending the era of
the armed knight and the Feudal Age. They installed a kind of rough

viiviii I N T R O D U C T I O N

democracy on the battlefield, making “all men alike tall.” We can
only wonder what effect weapons of mass destruction (WMD) might
have on our own time and civilization.
This series will trace the evolution of a variety of key weapons
systems, describe the major changes that occurred in each, and illus-
trate and identify the key types. Each volume begins with a descrip-
tion of the particular weapons system and traces its evolution, while
discussing its historical, social, and political contexts. This is fol-
lowed by a heavily illustrated section that is arranged more or less
along chronological lines that provides more precise information on
at least eighty key variants of that particular weapons system. Each
volume contains a glossary of terms, a bibliography of leading books
on that particular subject, and an index.
Individual volumes in the series, each written by a specialist in
that particular area of expertise, are as follows:

Aircraft Carriers
Ancient Weapons
Artillery
Ballistic Missiles
Battleships
Cruisers and Battle Cruisers
Destroyers
Helicopters
Machine Guns
Medieval Weapons
Military Aircraft, Origins to 1918
Military Aircraft, 1919–1945
Military Aircraft in the Jet Age
Pistols
Riﬂes
Submarines
Tanks

We hope that this series will be of wide interest to specialists, re-
searchers, and even general readers.

Spencer C. Tucker
Series EditorP R E FA C E

From the advent of the earliest of the type, submarine
design has always pressed against the outer limits of the contempo-
rary technological envelope. Inventors and engineers have, of ne-
c e s s i t y, incorporated new and untested machinery and equipment
into their craft in order to meet their goals of creating effective
undersea vessels. The underwater environment, moreover, is unfor-
giving; errors in operation or failures of equipment have very dan-
gerous and even fatal consequences. Success in submarine design,
therefore, has come to those naval architects who have combined
innovation and experimentation with substantial direct, prior expe-
rience or knowledge.
The obvious potential military advantages of the stealthy and
lethal capabilities of successful submarines soon attracted the atten-
tion of admiralties around the world. Early designers of practical
craft found a relatively ready market for their wares, either through
export or license construction by their customers. Designs by the
German Wilhelm Bauer were constructed in Germany and Russia,
while George Garrett’s boats, built by the Swedish industrialist
Thorsten Nordenfeldt in Sweden and Britain, were marketed to
Greece, Tu r k e y, and Russia. Beginning in the years around 1900,
boats by Maxime Laubeuf in France, the Italian Cesare Laurenti,
and above all, John P. Holland in the United States, found ready
markets in navies around the world in the years before World War I.
The maturation of submarines as a result of operations during
World War I expanded the global demand for the type. Design teams
with successful records dominated this worldwide arms market.
Firms from Britain, France, Germany, Italy, and the United States
prevailed in this trade in submarines. In the German case, since in-
digenous submarine design and construction had been prohibited by
the Versailles Treaty, the design teams established themselves across

ixx P R E FA C E

the border in the Netherlands and contracted out construction to
yards in other European countries. A similar situation pertained af-
ter World War II, although Italian designs, no longer on the cutting
edge, faded from the export market, while the emphasis on nuclear
propulsion in the United States led that nation to withdraw from
overseas sales to avoid the distribution of sensitive technologies. Its
place was taken by substantial export of both vessels and designs by
the Soviet Union, the resurgence of the German submarine industry,
and the maturing of Swedish design and construction.
To more accurately reﬂect the sources of the global distribution of
submarines, I have chosen to organize the reference sections by the
national origins of the various designs rather than by the navies that
operated them (national operators are indicated thus: [Norway]).
This focus on the design origins overrides consideration of construc-
tion location; for example, submarine construction began in both the
Netherlands and Sweden before World War I but neither nation pro-
duced many truly indigenous designs until well after the war’s end.
This approach allows readers more readily to comprehend both the
extent of design distribution to the various operators and the evolu-
tion of submarine designs within speciﬁc national contexts.C H A P T E R O N E

Early Submarines

Early submarines, in general, were the products of individual
innovators who pursued their obsessions with creating practical un-
derwater craft independent of governments or navies. Their designs
usually came to fruition despite the lack of any perceived need for
their development—indeed, quite often it was in the face of opposi-
tion that these craft saw the light of day. This phenomenon contrasts
dramatically with the developmental story of the aircraft carrier, that
other most revolutionary warship of the twentieth century, whose
features and evolution invariably reﬂected ofﬁcial concepts and re-
quirements. Furthermore, the inﬂuence of individual designers’ in-
novative ideas on submarine development was to persist strongly
throughout much of the type’s history.
While suggestions for various “diving boats” had been put forward
on occasion from the time of Alexander the Great, the ﬁrst designer
to produce a vessel that successfully traveled underwater seems to
have been Cornelius Drebbel, a Dutchman serving as court inventor
to King James I. His boat, propelled by twelve oarsmen, made a
submerged voyage along the River Thames at London in 1623. Un-
fortunately, while eyewitnesses described the event, they gave no in-
dication of how Drebbel’s boat functioned.
During the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, designers in
Russia were prolific in projecting submarine boats, although quite
a few of the proposals from that period were conceptual rather
than actual. Czar Peter I supported Yefim Nikonov’s proposal for a
submarine armed with rocket missiles, leading to the completion
of a prototype in June 1720. Its trials were sufficiently successful
to support orders for further boats, but problems with their

12 S U B M A R I N E S

leaking, and the death of Peter in January 1725, led to the pro-
j e c t ’s abandonment.
The next Russian project came to fruition over a century later,
when Engineer-General Karl Andreyevich Shilder’s iron submersible
was completed by Ivan Fedorovich Aleksandrovskiy’s yard at St. Pe-
tersburg in May 1834. After trials, a larger version was constructed
that Shilder used to destroy a target vessel with a towed mine in July
1838. Trials continued until the fall of 1841, when Shilder was or-
dered to terminate the project.
Wilhelm Bauer, a former noncommissioned ofﬁcer in the Bavar-
ian Army, was one of the archetypical submarine designers of the lat-
ter half of the nineteenth century. Between 1850 and his death in
1875, Bauer generated several submarine designs that he attempted
to sell to governments in Germany, France, the United Kingdom,
Russia, Austria, and the United States. His prototype was con-
structed at August Howaldt’s Kiel shipyard. The B r a n d t a u c h e r w a s
deployed brieﬂy during the First Schleswig War and caused the Dan-
ish Fleet blockading Kiel to move farther off shore; however, when
Bauer demonstrated it to the public on 1 February 1851, it sank in
the harbor, without loss of life. The wreck was recovered in 1887
and is now exhibited in the Deutsches Armeemuseum at Potsdam.
Bauer produced an enlarged and improved design that he promoted,
unsuccessfully, to the Bavarian, Austrian, and British governments.
Eventually, however, largely because of the outbreak of the Crimean
War, he attracted the support of the Russian Grand Duke Konstan-
tin Nikolaevich, leading to the construction of his design by the
Leuchtemburg Works at St. Petersburg and its acceptance by the
Russian Admiralty as the Diable Marin on 2 November 1855. His
submarine, driven by a single propeller powered by a crew working
treadmills geared to the shaft, was remarkably successful. It made
134 dives between May and October of 1856, including one four-
hour mission on 6 September for the coronation festivities of the
new czar, Aleksandr II, during which a four-piece brass ensemble
played while underwater, being clearly audible on the surface. Nev-
ertheless, although Bauer continued to receive support from the
grand duke for designing an even larger boat, the Admiralty was less
enthusiastic, leading him to leave Russia in frustration during the
spring of 1858. He returned to Germany and continued promoting
his designs, without success, until his death on 20 June 1875.
The Crimean War also stimulated the development of indigenous
submarine projects in Russia. Several naval ofﬁcers put forward sug-
gestions for submarines to be deployed in defense of Sevastopol,E A R LY SUBMARINES 3

though there is no evidence that any were built. Major General Kon-
stantin Borisov Gern also proposed a series of submarine designs for
boats to defend Russian Baltic ports and managed to interest the war
ministry in constructing at least three different craft between 1855
and 1871. His final design was steam powered and carried a self-
propelled torpedo, but, after initially successful trials, the ministry
lost interest. A l e k s a n d r o v s k i y, whose shipyard had built Shilder’s
boat in 1834, also designed a large 355-ton submarine that was com-
pleted by the Baltic Works at St. Petersburg in May 1866. Powered
by two 70-horsepower compressed-air engines, it also used com-
pressed air to evacuate the ballast tank and incorporated an airlock
through which divers could exit to place its mine armament against
its targets. It ran extensive trials until 1871, when a 100-foot dive ex-
ceeded its crush limits and the hull collapsed. Aleksandrovskiy pro-
posed at least two further designs, although no construction ensued.
Grand Duke Konstantin also gave his support to the Polish-born
engineer Stefan K. Drzewiecki’s submarine projects. Again, conﬂict
provided the immediate impetus, in this instance the outbreak of the
Russo-Turkish War of 1877. Drzewiecki built and tested two succes-
sive designs for small, man-powered submersibles that led to the
construction of a series of 50 production units for the war ministry
by the Nevskiy Shipbuilding and Machinery Works at St. Petersburg
between 1879 and 1881. The army deployed these craft in the de-
fense of Kronshtadt and Sevastopol until they were transferred to
the navy in 1885, whereupon they were discarded as ineffective.
Drzewiecki himself moved to France in 1887, where he proposed
several semisubmersible designs for the French Fleet, none of which
were built, and also developed his very successful drop-collar tor-
pedo launch system that saw extensive use on both French and Rus-
sian submarines into the 1920s.
Russian interest in submarines revived in the 1890s, leading to
the establishment of a special submarine committee on 19 Decem-
ber 1900, headed by Ivan Grigorevich Bubnov. It evaluated both
foreign and native designs and by June 1901 had produced an in-
digenous design that was constructed as the D e l f i n . Bubnov went
on to design a series of submarines for the Imperial Russian Navy,
culminating with the Bars class, laid down immediately before
World War I.
U.S. inventors also were proliﬁc producers of submarine propos-
als. David Bushnell’s Turtle made the ﬁrst (abortive) attack on a sur-
face ship, when Sergeant Ezra Lee of the Continental Army used it
in an attempt to attach an explosive charge to the British 64-gun4 S U B M A R I N E S

ship Eagle in New York harbor on 7 September 1776. Robert Fulton,
famous later for his success with steam-propelled vessels, built a
submarine, the N a u t i l u s , at Paris in 1800 that he successfully
demonstrated to the French government. He hoped to sell the
boat—copper skinned over iron frames and driven by a hand-
cranked propeller while submerged—but was rebuffed and sold the
craft for scrap. Two other U.S. submarines apparently were on occa-
sion operated during the War of 1812. Among other submarines
proposed or built subsequently were two by the Indiana shoemaker
Lodner D. Phillips, the second of which succeeded in diving to 100
feet in 1852. Phillips offered his boat to the U.S. Navy but was re-
jected; he was turned down again when he offered to build another
submarine at the outbreak of the Civil War in 1861.
Nevertheless, the Civil War stimulated unofﬁcial interest in sub-
marines in both the Union and the Confederacy. At least three
Northern projects saw fruition. The first, the A l l i g a t o r, was the
brainchild of Brutus de Villeroi, a French immigrant inventor who,
in 1859, had built a submarine for a Philadelphia treasure-hunting
consortium. (Before coming to the United States, de Villeroi had
taught mathematics in France. His students, it seems, included Jules
Verne, whose 1870 novel Twenty Thousand Leagues under the Sea
greatly popularized the notion of submarines.) De Vi l l e r o i ’s earlier
project still was extant in 1861 when war came and he staged a dra-
matic demonstration in Philadelphia harbor—during which he and
the submarine were arrested—to promote his concepts.
The Alligator was built for the U.S. Navy by the Philadelphia Navy
Yard and commissioned in May 1862. After ineffective service on the
James and Appomattox rivers (the waters there were too shallow),
the boat was reﬁtted at Washington Navy Yard and dispatched to en-
gage in operations off Charleston, South Carolina. While under tow
to the war zone, the Alligator foundered in a storm off the North
Carolina Outer Banks on 2 April 1863; its wreck is currently the
subject of a major search.
Also vying for a navy contract was Julius Kroehl, a German immi-
grant engineer who had considerable experience working with diving
bells. Kroehl built his design as a private venture after de Vi l l e r o i
won the ofﬁcial contract, but his boat was still incomplete at the end
of the war. He succeeded, however, in selling both his Sub Marine
Explorer and his own expertise to the Paciﬁc Pearl Company in 1866
as a platform for exploiting the prolific pearl oyster beds off the
Panamanian Pacific coast, where it operated for three years. TheE A R LY SUBMARINES 5

abandoned craft was found close inshore in 2000 and currently is
under active archaeological investigation.
The third Northern boat, the Intelligent Whale, was built by the
American Submarine Company, a group of speculators who planned
to use it as a privateer. When that plan failed and the U.S. Navy de-
clined to accept the boat, construction slowed and it was not com-
pleted until 1866. In 1872 the navy eventually agreed to undertake
trials of the Intelligent Whale, which it failed, and the submarine
was abandoned. It still survives, however, and is on exhibit at the Na-
tional Guard Militia Museum of New Jersey at Sea Girt.
Inventors in the Confederacy also produced several submarines,
the best known being James R. McClintock’s series of boats, initially
built as private venture privateers. The ﬁrst, the Pioneer, was built
for Horace L. Hunley’s New Orleans privateering consortium but
was scuttled before becoming operational when the city fell to the
Union in April 1862. McClintock then built the Pioneer II at Mo-
bile. Efforts to make ﬁrst an electric motor and then a steam plant
functional both failed, and McClintock had to revert to a hand-
cranked propeller to drive his boat. The Pioneer II was not a great
success, and it sank while being towed to attack the Union Fleet off
Fort Monroe. The expanded consortium constructed a third boat,
the H.L. Hunley, whose trials proved more successful; its transfer in
July of 1863 to Charleston, South Carolina, led to its proposed use
to break the Union blockade by General P. G. T. Beauregard, the lo-
cal commander. The Confederate Navy, reluctant to trust the abili-
ties or enthusiasm of the boat’s civilian crew, seized it and manned it
with naval personnel. An accident drowned ﬁve of its crew on 30 Au-
gust, and another on 15 October drowned the entire replacement
crew, including Hunley himself. The boat ﬁnally went into action on
the night of 17 February 1864, sinking the steam sloop Housatonic,
but it failed to return. The novelist Clive Cussler funded an expedi-
tion that located the wreck of the H.L. Hunley in May 1995. It was
raised in August 2000 and is currently undergoing conservation in
Charleston.
In addition to a series of semisubmersible spar torpedo boats,
known as Davids, for the Confederate Navy, the South produced sev-
eral other submarines. Little is known about the origins of a boat
built at New Orleans in June 1861, although it is most probably the
vessel that was found during dredging operations there in 1879; it is
now on exhibit at the Louisiana State Museum in the city. The Tre-
degar Ironworks at Richmond, Virginia, built at least one boat to a6 S U B M A R I N E S

design by William Cheeney. After successful trials on the James
River in October 1861, it was sunk while attacking a Union ship in
Hampton Roads the following month. John Halligan designed a sub-
marine, the St. Patrick, which was built at the Selma Navy Yard for
the Confederate Navy and commissioned in January 1865. It made
an abortive attack on the gunboat Octorara on 27 January and most
probably was scuttled in April when the war came to an end.
The U.S. Navy, especially after its unhappy experiences with ﬁr s t
the Alligator and then the Intelligent Whale, expressed no interest in
submarines, but that did not deter private inventors. The most
successful and inﬂuential of them was John P. Holland, an Irish im-
migrant who single-mindedly pursued the creation of a practical sub-
marine for 40 years from 1874, submitting in that year a design for a
one-man submarine to the navy. It was rejected, but Holland found
financial backing from the Fenian Brotherhood, an organization
working for Irish independence that saw the potential for submarines
in overturning the Royal Navy’s supremacy and forcing Britain to give
up its rule of Ireland. He built a gasoline-engine-powered prototype
(Holland I) in 1878, followed by the larger Fenian Ram in 1881. A f t e r
two years of meticulous trials in New York Harbor, the Fenian Broth-
erhood, frustrated by Holland’s perfectionism, seized the boat and
moved it to New Haven, Connecticut. It eventually was exhibited in
H o l l a n d ’s hometown of Paterson, New Jersey, where it remains today.
Holland, meanwhile, formed a new partnership, the Nautilus Subma-
rine Boat Company, with a group led by Edmund L. Zalinsky, a U.S.
Army artillery ofﬁc e r. Using additional data gleaned from a half-size
boat (Holland III) he had built while the Fenian Ram was undergoing
trials, Holland developed a new submarine armed with Zalinsky’s dy-
namite gun (Holland IV). A botched launching on 4 September 1885
sank the new boat, but it was raised, repaired, and tested. The part-
nership was unable to ﬁnd a purchaser for its submarine, however,
and the company folded by the winter of 1886.
An open U.S. Navy competition for submarine designs in 1888 re-
vived Holland’s hopes. His design was judged the best, but his spon-
soring shipbuilder—the William Cramp and Sons Ship and Engine
Building Company at Philadelphia—declined to guarantee its per-
formance and the contract was canceled. He won a second competi-
tion the following year, only to see that contract also canceled, when
President Benjamin Harrison’s new secretary of the navy, Benjamin
F. Tr a c y, transferred the funds to surface ship projects. Congress
again funded a submarine in 1893 and Holland’s design once more
won the competition, but it was not until 1895 that the John P.E A R LY SUBMARINES 7

Holland Torpedo Boat Company received a contract to build the
Plunger for the U.S. Navy. Official requirements included steam
propulsion and a triple screw arrangement, both of which Holland
correctly anticipated would cause problems.
While the Plunger was still being built, the company began con-
struction of a private venture boat, the Holland VI, that more accu-
rately reﬂected Holland’s concept of a submarine to meet the navy’s
needs. This boat proved itself one of the most successful submarines
yet built; it attracted much foreign attention and eventually was pur-
chased by the U.S. Navy on 11 April 1900 and commissioned as the
Holland. The costs of testing and perfecting it, however, forced Hol-
land to seek additional capital, leading to the incorporation of his
ﬁrm in 1899 into the Electric Boat Company as a subsidiary. He be-
came the company’s general manager but soon was demoted to chief
engineer and learned that ownership of his patents, both U.S. and
international, had passed to the Electric Boat Company. He resigned
from the ﬁrm on 28 March 1904, even as his improved Holland VII
design became a spectacular success: 24 examples served with the
U.S., British, Russian, Japanese, and Dutch ﬂeets, and provided the
starting point for further major development in those countries and
Austria-Hungary. Only two further boats designed by Holland him-
self were constructed, for Japan, before he died on 12 August 1914.
The Electric Boat Company, in the meantime, went on to dominate
the design of submarines for the U.S. Navy until after the end of
World War I and continued as a major exporter of both vessels and
designs.
Holland was not without rivals for submarine work. In 1885,
Josiah H. L. Tuck constructed a submarine that used caustic soda to
generate heat for a boiler that provided steam to its engine. The
Peacemaker had a submerged endurance of ﬁve hours and partici-
pated in the U.S. Navy’s 1888 and 1889 competitions. Tuck’s family,
fearing that he had squandered most of his fortune on his experi-
ments, had him committed to an insane asylum soon afterward. Hol-
land also faced competition from George C. Baker in 1893. Not only
did Baker have a full-size submarine to demonstrate (Holland was
quite complimentary about its use of swiveling propellers amidships
and the incorporation of a clutch that allowed the steam engine to
charge the batteries while running on the surface) but he also was
well connected in Washington, which accounted for a good part of
the delay in awarding the contract to Holland.
H o l l a n d ’s most serious competitor, however, was Simon Lake,
who adopted a very different approach to submarine operation.8 S U B M A R I N E S

Holland designed his submarines to operate underwater with a
small net positive buoyancy and to dive, maintain depth, and sur-
face using the dynamic forces generated by the motion of water
over the stern diving planes. His main ballast tanks filled
completely upon submerging to achieve stability by eliminating
free-surface motion and maintaining a fixed center of gravity
amidships. This formula made his boats safe and maneuverable un-
derwater but also made them slow to dive. Lake relied on a combi-
nation of ballast adjustment to control buoyancy—using several
tanks and pumps—and multiple diving planes to control depth. His
submarines dived and rose on a level keel. Lake’s formula made his
submarines potentially less safe and less hydrodynamically effi-
cient than Holland’s, but also much faster divers. Lake’s early
submarines (Argonaut I a n d II) also incorporated diver’s airlocks
and wheels for movement on the seabed, largely because he ini-
tially conceived his craft for salvage operations. They were not suc-
cessful at first in attracting interest from the U.S. Navy but were
exported to Russia and A u s t r i a - H u n g a r y. His designs, in the ab-
sence of adequate patent protection, were also thoroughly ex-
ploited by Krupp’s Germania shipyard and its submarine designer,
Raimondo Lorenzo D’Equevilley-Montjustin, in producing its first
boats, supplied to the Russian, German, Austro-Hungarian, and
Norwegian fleets. Lake obtained his first domestic contract in
1909 and continued to build a relatively small number of boats for
the U.S. Navy until his firm went out of business in 1924.
The French Navy was the most enthusiastic advocate of sub-
marines prior to 1900. Its ﬁrst boat, the Plongeur, was designed by
Charles Brun and Siméon Bourgeois, entering service in 1867. It
used an 80-horsepower compressed-air engine for propulsion and re-
lied on small stern diving planes and an elaborate water transfer sys-
tem, also compressed-air operated, to maintain position. This system
proved ineffective, and the Plongeur soon was set aside. Electric
propulsion underwater seemed a superior solution and was demon-
strated by Claude Goubet in two small private venture boats that
otherwise were unsuccessful. The French Navy’s return to subma-
rine construction was also all-electric. The G y m n ô t e , designed by
Gustave Zédé, entered service in 1888 and was followed by Gaston
R o m a z z o t t i ’s Gustave Zédé ﬁve years later. Both boats were largely
experimental, relied wholly on batteries without onboard recharge
equipment to power their electric motors (severely restricting their
range), and required many modiﬁcations, especially to their diving
plane arrangements, to become effective.E A R LY SUBMARINES 9

In 1898 the French Navy announced an open international sub-
marine design competition. Maxime Laubeuf’s design, the N a r v a l ,
was the winner, and, although many of the boat’s features were
short-lived, it established the essential characteristics of the vast ma-
jority of the world’s naval submarines until the end of World War II.
Laubeuf designed the Narval as a double-hulled craft; the inner hull
was strongly constructed to resist water pressure, while the outer
hull was lightly built and optimized for surface performance. The
space between the hulls accommodated ballast and trim tanks. The
Narval, like almost all submarines for the next 50 years, was essen-
tially a surface torpedo boat that could submerge to attack and make
its escape. Like many French submarines of the next 25 years, it was
steam powered: the French Navy was uncomfortable with using
gasoline engines in submarines because of the explosion hazard. In
1904 the Aigrette became the first submarine to be fitted with a
diesel engine, and with few exceptions all later French submarines
used either diesel or steam plants. Steam engines remained attrac-
tive because France did not have access to sufficiently powerful
diesel engines for its large boats.
The Royal Navy came late to submarine operation, and much of
its early design development built upon experience with Holland’s
boats. There had, however, been an earlier native effort in submarine
design. In 1878, George W. Garrett built a small submarine
(R e s u r g a m) driven by a hand-cranked propeller, and he followed it
the next year with a larger steam-powered craft. The Resurgam II
relied on the retained superheated steam in its boiler to power its en-
gine while submerged. Garrett had not fully solved his boat’s longitu-
dinal stability problems, but it nevertheless attracted the attention of
the Swedish industrialist Thorsten Nordenfelt, who contracted with
AB Palmcrants and Company in Stockholm to build an enlarged ver-
sion of the Resurgam. Known as the Nordenfelt I, it was purchased
by the Greek Navy in 1886 at a time of considerable tension over the
status of Macedonia. In response the Turkish government ordered
two larger boats of similar type that were delivered in 1887, one of
which, the Abdul Hamid, was the ﬁrst submarine to launch a self-
propelled torpedo while submerged. The ﬁnal Garrett-designed boat,
the Nordenfelt IV, was built for Russia in 1887 at the Barrow-in-Fur-
ness yard, which would later become the most proliﬁc producer of
submarines in the United Kingdom. Nordenfelt IV ran aground off
the Danish coast while on its delivery voyage and was lost.
British submarine design took a decisive turn away from Holland’s
concepts with the development of the D class, which entered service10 S U B M A R I N E S

in 1908. These much larger boats introduced saddle tanks for ballast
and marked the British shift to long-range craft optimized for sur-
face operation and seaworthiness. They set the pattern for subse-
quent British development that was broken only by the R class, built
as antisubmarine platforms and optimized for underwater per-
formance, which entered service very late in World War I. The only
other deviation was the manifestation of a fixation for “fleet sub-
marines”—boats fast enough to accompany the battleﬂeet while on
the surface and operate as stealth torpedo boats upon contacting the
enemy. The J class was essentially a normal British type ﬁtted with
greatly increased engine power. The K class used steam turbines to
generate the speed required, but it proved appallingly dangerous and
difﬁcult to operate.
Despite Bauer’s early work and the considerable effort expended
on submarines in both Russia and France in the later nineteenth
century, there was little German interest in the type until the dawn
of the twentieth century. The Krupp industrial conglomerate, how-
ever, saw the potential for a new market and began working aggres-
sively to stimulate it. It began by building a small boat designed by a
Spanish engineer, Raimondo Lorenzo D’Equevilley-Montjustin,
whose ideas owed much to Nordenfelt’s submarines. His Fo r e l l e
proved moderately successful but did not attract German naval at-
tention. Fortunately for Krupp, lack of U.S. Navy interest in his de-
signs led Simon Lake to turn to Europe as a market for his boats. He
attempted to negotiate a license arrangement with Krupp, in the pro-
cess transferring much of his design information to the ﬁrm as an
inducement. The deal fell through, but Krupp retained the data;
D’Equevilley exploited this knowledge to produce a very competent
design that found buyers in Russia, Norway, A u s t r i a - H u n g a r y, and
Germany. This activity stimulated ofﬁcial interest, leading the Tor-
pedo Department of the Imperial German Navy to set up the Unter-
seebootkonstruktionsbüro in 1904, led by Gustave Berling; it devel-
oped its own somewhat similar submarine design, which went into
production in 1907.
The departure of the non-German D’Equevilley and his replace-
ment by Hans Techel on 1 July 1907, opened the way for cooperation
between Krupp and the navy and rapid design development in the
years before World War I. The result was technical improvement and
growth in size and capabilities, although it is notable that the navy
was slow to adopt diesel engines in place of gasoline or oil engines.
During World War I the Imperial German Navy accepted some
100 new boats of the Mobilization type, a largely standardized designE A R LY SUBMARINES 11

subject to continual improvements culminating in the Mittel-U type,
which proved very capable. These standard submarines were supple-
mented by mass-produced coastal boats particularly suited to the
geographic advantage of operating from Flanders against enemy
shipping from 1915. The UB series of conventional submarines
evolved, from very small UB-I boats of 127 tons with 14-man crews,
to the 516-ton UB-III boats that were essentially diminutives of the
Mittel-U type. The parallel UC series of coastal minelaying sub-
marines followed a similar evolutionary path. In addition, the navy
also commissioned a few full-size minelayers and a series of very
large, long-range boats, the U-cruisers.
Both Italy and Sweden began indigenous submarine design and
construction virtually contemporaneously with similar developments
in Germany. Italian submarine development was dominated by the
concepts of Cesare Laurenti, whose designs conformed to the sub-
mersible torpedo boat school propounded by Laubeuf. The Swedish
Navy sent one of its designers, Carl Richson, on a mission to study
overseas submarine design and construction. Upon his return he be-
gan development of his own boats, drawing heavily on Holland prin-
ciples at ﬁrst but soon trending more toward submersible-type craft.

ALLIED SUBMARINE OPERAT I O N S
DURING WORLD WAR I

At the outbreak of World War I, the British and French navies were
by far the two largest operators of submarines in the world, each
possessing more than twice as many as the German Fleet. The Rus-
sian Fleet had a relatively long tradition of submarine operation, but
its force was small and divided between the Baltic and Black seas.
Like all the world’s navies, they had no clear doctrines for the use of
their submarine forces, nor any real appreciation of the directions
that wartime operations would take.
The main British submarine force was deployed as the 8th (Over-
seas) Submarine Flotilla, with the most modern, long-range boats at
Harwich. Its primary role was offensive patrol and reconnaissance
off the German coast. The older, short-range vessels were deployed
to Grimsby, Dover, and Portsmouth, to provide coastal defense pa-
trols along the eastern and southern coasts. French submarines were
deployed in the Channel and, initially, in a defensive barrier to cover
the movement of troops from North Africa to Metropolitan France.12 S U B M A R I N E S

The British overseas submarines undertook patrols in the Hel-
goland Bight from the outset, bringing back useful information
about the German Fleet’s movements. Several attempts were made
to employ submarines in conjunction with surface units during
sweeps intended to trap and destroy elements of the High Seas
Fleet, but none were very successful. Patrol lines intended to am-
bush German Fleet units became a regular feature of British North
Sea submarine operation throughout the war. They had some suc-
cesses and caused the Germans to exercise caution in their opera-
tions, but overall they were relatively unproductive.
Russia had eight active submarines in the Baltic, of which only
one was capable of more than short-range operation. The Admiralty
decided to send submarines to the Baltic to support Russian opera-
tions and to attack the ore trafﬁc from Sweden to Germany. In Octo-
ber 1914, two submarines, the E-1 and the E-9, passed through the
Danish Straits and arrived at Lapvik to commence operations. Ger-
man antisubmarine activity forced a third submarine to return. They
undertook several patrols in conjunction with Russian submarines
before the onset of winter ended operations.
Baltic submarine operations resumed in late April. The E - 9 ,
commanded by Lieutenant-Commander Max Horton, gained the
first success by sinking the collier Dora Hugo Stennes and severely
damaging the destroyer S - 1 4 8 on 5 June 1915. The British sent
four additional submarines to the Baltic in August, one of which
ran aground off Copenhagen and was destroyed; the others suc-
cessfully joined operations. The E - 1 , commanded by Lieutenant-
Commander Noel Laurence, damaged the battlecruiser Von der
Ta n n on 19 August; the E - 8 destroyed the armored cruiser P r i n z
A d a l b e r t on 23 October; and the E - 1 9 sank the light cruiser
U n d i n e on 7 November. In addition, British and Russian sub-
marines sank or captured 17 freighters and caused 4 more to
strand. These operations, especially against German warships,
caused considerable disruption of German operations in the Baltic
during the year and prompted the Swedish Navy to begin convoy-
ing its shipping.
In response to the depredations of Allied submarines in 1915, the
German commander-in-chief, Grossadmiral Prinz Heinrich von
Preussen, introduced escorted convoy of shipping between Sweden
and Germany. That proved very successful: only ﬁve freighters were
lost, despite intensive Allied submarine activity, while one British
submarine sank after hitting a mine. The British sent another four
small submarines to the Baltic in August via Arkhangel’sk, but theyE A R LY SUBMARINES 13

were not operational until early October; they undertook only one
patrol before ice ended operations.
During 1917, Allied submarines were heavily engaged in an at-
tempt to hinder German advances into the Gulf of Riga, in which
they were largely unsuccessful. Only a single freighter was sunk dur-
ing that year, while one British and three Russian submarines were
lost. In addition, German advances led to the scuttling of four Rus-
sian and seven British submarines to prevent them from falling into
enemy hands.
The A n g l o - French assault on the Dardanelles in April 1915
prompted both navies to send submarines into the Sea of Marmora
to attack Turkish shipping and warships supporting the defenders. A
total of 13 submarines attempted the passage, but only five suc-
ceeded in reaching their goal, four from each navy being lost. The
submarines sank the battleship B a r b a r o s s a , the coast defense ship
Messudiyeh, 6 smaller warships, 55 merchant ships, and 148 sailing
vessels, although some of those subsequently were salved. Russian
submarines also operated against Turkish shipping in the Black Sea
with some success. The submarine Nerpa was particularly success-
ful: on 5 September, operating with two destroyers, it wiped out a
Turkish convoy of ﬁve ships by driving them ashore where the de-
stroyers shelled them to destruction.
Russian operations continued against Turkish and German ship-
ping in the Black Sea throughout 1916 and 1917, right up to the
time of the Russian Revolution. Although the number of vessels they
sank was relatively small, their operations caused considerable dis-
ruption of vital trafﬁc, especially coal deliveries. By the end of 1916,
the shortage of coal was such that the Turkish Fleet at Istanbul had
been essentially immobilized. The Russians never deployed more
than ten submarines in the Black Sea: they carried out well over 250
patrols during 1916 and 1917, with the loss of only one boat.
France deployed submarines to the Adriatic in 1914, losing the
Curie on 8 December in an attempt to penetrate the Austrian base at
Pola. After Italy entered the war, 6 French submarines joined some
20 Italian boats in operations in the Adriatic. Both sides in the Adri-
atic conducted a campaign of hit-and-run raids and ambushes
throughout much of the war. Allied submarines played a major role
in these operations, but overall their successes were very limited: a
half-dozen small warships and fewer than 50 merchant vessels, for
the loss of 12 of their own number.
Allied submarines also took part in the antisubmarine campaign.
Between May and October 1915, the British deployed submarines14 S U B M A R I N E S

towed behind decoy trawlers, the two vessels communicating via
telephone lines. When a U-boat approached the trawler, the towed
submarine would be cast off and would maneuver to attack it. The
program had two successes but was abandoned once the British
learned that the Germans had become aware of its existence. Anti-
submarine warfare became the primary mission of the British sub-
marine force during the final two years of the war, and they were
joined by U.S. Navy boats in March of 1918. The Admiralty divided
the waters around the British Isles into patrol areas in which individ-
ual submarines operated for eight-day periods, submerging by day
and surfacing at night. The campaign succeeded in sinking 13 out of
390 sighted U-boats. The low ratio of sightings to sinkings was pri-
marily a consequence of the low speed of submerged submarines.
That led to the development of the specialized “R” class boats, whose
underwater speed was almost twice that of their surfaced speed;
h o w e v e r, these submarines entered service too late to have an im-
pact on the war.

CENTRAL POWERS SUBMARINE
O P E R ATIONS DURING WORLD WAR I

When war began in 1914, both Germany and Austria-Hungary had
small but relatively up-to-date ﬂeets of submarines (there were 31
operational U-boats in the German Navy and 5 in the A u s t r o -
Hungarian). Like the Allies, they had no clear doctrines concerning
their use. Furthermore, the prewar plans of neither ﬂeet long sur-
vived contact with the realities of the war. The Royal Navy adopted a
strategy of distant blockade rather than the close blockade that the
German Navy had anticipated, while Italy declined to join its allies
in the Triple Alliance and chose to remain neutral, upsetting A u s-
trian expectations of the situation in the Adriatic.
Germany adopted a strategy of k l e i n k r i e g , seeking to draw out
elements of the Grand Fleet into disadvantageous positions, both
geographically and numerically, and whittling away at British naval
strength with mines and submarines. During 1914, German
U-boats, demonstrating much greater operational capabilities than
prewar exercises had suggested, scored considerable successes. The
most spectacular was on 22 September, when Kapitänleutnant Otto
Weddigen, commanding the U - 9 , torpedoed and sank three British
armored cruisers—the A b o u k i r, the C r e s s y, and the H o g u e— w i t h i nE A R LY SUBMARINES 15

little more than an hour off the Dutch coast. The Royal Navy very
quickly came to regard the menace of German submarines as the
greatest single threat to its naval superiority.
Despite this success, by early 1915 it was clear that the strategy of
kleinkrieg was not working. The British distant blockade was proving
all too effective in cutting off Germany’s access to most foreign
trade, while the Grand Fleet, far from allowing detached elements to
fall into German traps, was succeeding in cutting off detachments of
the High Seas Fleet and inﬂicting serious damage upon them. The
threat of an intensiﬁed British mining campaign and the expansion
of the terms of the blockade were tightening the screw.
German submarines had not conducted any coordinated campaign
against Allied merchant shipping: the transport of the British Expedi-
tionary Force to France and its subsequent supply had been con-
ducted virtually without any interference from the German Fleet. But
German submarines had demonstrated that U-boats could be effec-
tive in that role, even under the limitations of the Prize Regulations
of the Declaration of London of 1909, which required warships ei-
ther to take merchant crews and passengers on board or provide for
their safety prior to sinking their ships. A growing number of ofﬁc e r s
within the navy, as well as inﬂuential politicians and businessmen,
began to see a “counterblockade” of Britain as the solution to Ger-
m a n y ’s dilemma, using submarines to attack and sink without warn-
ing all British shipping and neutral vessels trading with the United
Kingdom. The government was well aware of the potential for serious
repercussions from neutral nations, especially the United States, but
it decided that the gains were worth the risk. Therefore, on 4 Fe b r u-
ary 1915, the waters around Great Britain and Ireland, including the
whole of the English Channel and the western portion of the North
Sea, were declared to be a war zone within which any merchant ship,
British or neutral, would be destroyed, without necessarily being pos-
sible to ensure the safety of crew or passengers.
The German Navy began this ﬁrst unrestricted submarine cam-
paign against merchant shipping with very limited resources. Ty p i-
cally there were no more than about 25 operational U-boats avail-
able, of which only about one-third were deployed on station at any
one time (the remainder being either in transit or reﬁtting). The cam-
paign began on 28 Fe b r u a r y, and, despite the small number of active
U-boats, did well. In all, 29 vessels totaling some 89,500 gross tons
were sunk in March; 33 ships totaling 38,600 tons in April; 53 vessels
totaling 126,900 tons in May; 114 ships totaling 115,291 tons in
June; 86 ships totaling 98,005 tons in July; 107 vessels totaling16 S U B M A R I N E S

182,772 tons in August; and 58 ships totaling 136,048 tons in Sep-
t e m b e r. British antisubmarine measures accounted for 15 U-boats,
but the German Navy commissioned 25 new boats during the period.
The German announcement of 4 February had almost immediate
diplomatic repercussions, especially the U.S. government’s note
warning Germany that it would be held strictly accountable for any
loss of U.S. ships or lives. Consequently, the German government
compromised on its initial declaration, placing some restrictions on
attacks against vessels flying neutral flags. That was much to the
chagrin of ofﬁcers in the ﬂeet, who had envisaged the unrestricted
campaign so terrorizing neutral shippers that they would cease to
trade with Great Britain. A number of attacks on Dutch, Greek, Nor-
wegian, and Swedish vessels, including some inside areas declared
safe, provoked outraged diplomatic responses from those neutrals
and led to the German government offering compensation in several
instances and prohibiting attacks against neutral vessels.
The major blow, however, to the unrestricted campaign was the
sinking of the transatlantic liner Lusitania without warning off the
western coast of Ireland on 7 May 1915, by Kapitänleutnant Walter
Schwieger, commanding the U-20. Among the 1,201 passengers and
crew who lost their lives were 128 U.S. citizens, causing a major
diplomatic furor between the United States and Germany that was
heightened by the torpedoing of the U.S. ship N e b r a s k a n w i t h o u t
warning on 25 May. Chancellor Bethmann Hollweg, despite strong
opposition from the ﬂeet, forbade attacks on large passenger liners,
whatever ﬂag they ﬂew, and his efforts succeeded in mollifying Pres-
ident Wilson’s government—although Germany still suffered from a
sharp drop in the U.S. public’s estimation.
As the sinking record shows, these greater restrictions did not
substantially affect the success of the campaign against merchant
shipping. Nevertheless, there remained the threat of further inci-
dents that might force Germany to terminate the campaign.
Kapitänleutnant Schwieger, who had sunk the Lusitania, succeeded
in providing two such incidents by sinking the British liner A r a b i c
without warning on 19 August and the U.S. liner Hesperian later in
the month. Those two events provoked a further crisis between the
United States and Germany and exacerbated the concerns of the
German A r m y ’s general staff about increased complications with
neutral nations in light of an impending shortage of troops. The gov-
ernment, over the protests of senior naval ofﬁcers, forced a prohibi-
tion of attacks against any liners and a withdrawal of all U-boats
from operations in the western approaches to the English Channel.E A R LY SUBMARINES 17

Admiral Henning von Holtzendorff became head of the naval staff,
and, on 18 September, after deciding that the submarine campaign
had failed, he terminated most U-boat operations against shipping.
He also bound all continued action to conform with the Prize Regu-
lations, thus ending the unrestricted campaign.
The British merchant marine had lost 1,294,000 tons of shipping
from all causes up to the end of September 1915. New construction
totaled 1,233,00 tons, and captured enemy shipping added a further
682,000 tons. Nevertheless, losses were outstripping replacements,
while the sinkings in August and September were a serious concern
and an omen for the future potential of a submarine campaign.
Holtzendorff continued the restricted campaign against merchant
shipping. From October 1915 to February 1916, U-boats sank 209
ships totaling 506,026 gross tons (about 75 percent of those sinkings
were in the Mediterranean). The campaign sharpened after attacks
without warning were permitted against armed merchant vessels, be-
ginning on 29 Fe b r u a r y. During the next two months the U-boats
sank 143 ships totaling 347,843 tons, but again an incident involv-
ing U.S. citizens precipitated a further diplomatic crisis. On 24
March, Oberleutnant zur See Pustkuchen, commanding the UB-29,
torpedoed the French cross-Channel steamer Sussex without warn-
ing off Dieppe, killing some 50 passengers and crew including 25
Americans. President Wilson reacted by warning Germany that any
further incident would lead to the United States severing diplomatic
relations. On 24 April, Holtzendorff reinstated his order requiring
submarines to operate within the Prize Regulations, causing Admiral
Scheer angrily to order all submarines to cease operation. British
losses fell immediately, to 64,000 tons in May and only 37,000 tons
in June. Nevertheless, British shipping losses for the first half of
1916 approached a half-million tons, well over twice the rate of new
construction.
For the next few months the High Seas Fleet boats operated pri-
marily in support of ﬂeet operations on the North Sea, leaving at-
tacks on merchant shipping to the Flanders boats and U-boats in the
Mediterranean. The pace of the restricted campaign picked up in
S e p t e m b e r, when 172 ships totaling 231,573 tons were sunk. Be-
tween October 1916 and January 1917 a further 757 ships totaling
1,304,290 tons were sunk in all theaters. This increase reﬂected the
larger number of operational U-boats, which reached a total of 103
submarines in January 1917.
Despite this advance, the navy was convinced that the restricted
campaign was doomed to failure in bringing Britain to terms. When18 S U B M A R I N E S

combined with the Allied rejection of German peace proposals and
successes on the Eastern Front that released additional troops, the
consensus among the high command and in government tipped to-
ward renewal of the unrestricted campaign. Holtzendorff, relying on
calculations of available British shipping and requirements, and as-
suming that neutrals would be terrorized into ceasing to trade with
Britain, determined that an unrestricted campaign sinking 600,000
tons of shipping per month would reduce traffic to and from the
United Kingdom by close to 40 percent within ﬁve months and force
a peace settlement. There was a very real risk that such a campaign
would bring the United States into the war against Germany, but it
was thought that U.S. shipping and troops could not participate in
time to inﬂuence the outcome. On 9 January 1917, the government
decided that an unrestricted campaign would begin on 1 February.
The predicted diplomatic consequence of launching the new un-
restricted campaign was not long in coming. On 3 February 1917,
President Wilson severed diplomatic relations with Germany. The
Zimmerman Telegram—containing a proposal for a German-Mexi-
can and even a German-Japanese alliance against the United
States—surfaced and exacerbated the tension between the two na-
tions. A series of almost inevitable sinkings of U.S. ships or vessels
carrying U.S. citizens as passengers hastened matters, and on 6 April
the United States declared war on Germany.
The campaign commenced on schedule, with some 120 U-boats
deployed. Shipping losses rose dramatically to 520,412 tons in Feb-
ruary; 564,497 tons in March; and 860,334 tons in April, at the cost
of only nine U-boats. From that peak, losses dropped to 616,316
tons in May and 696,725 tons in June. As the British gradually ex-
panded the scope of convoy from mid-May, losses declined still fur-
ther to 555,514 tons in July; 472,372 tons in August; 353,602 tons
in September; 466,542 tons in October; 302,599 tons in November;
and 411,766 tons in December. Forty-three U-boats were sunk in
the same six-month period, more than three times the number lost
in the first six months of the year. During the first six months of
1918, U-boats sank 1,864,440 tons of shipping and a further
889,442 tons up to the Armistice on 11 November. German losses
were high—more than 120 U-boats were sunk. Furthermore, as the
U-boats sought out weak links—areas in which ships sailed without
the beneﬁt of convoy—the Allies extended the scope of the system
until the vast majority of shipping was covered. The German unre-
stricted submarine campaign against shipping had failed.E A R LY SUBMARINES 19

The small number of Austrian submarines in operational service
at the beginning of the war and their limited range effectively con-
ﬁned their use to the Adriatic. After France declared war on 13 Au-
gust 1914, elements of its Mediterranean Fleet commenced opera-
tions there, making sweeps with heavy ships and undertaking minor
landings—all in the hope of inﬂuencing Italy to join the Allies. Aus-
trian submarines always were a threat, one that became a reality on
21 December, when the U - 1 2 torpedoed the French flagship, the
dreadnought Jean Bart, without, however, sinking the battleship.
This incident convinced the French to give up offensive operations
in the Adriatic and focus instead on a distant blockade of the Straits
of Otranto.
In the run-up to the entry of Italy into the war on the side of the
Allies, the French moved their blockading squadron further north
into the Adriatic. Linienschiffsleutnant Georg Ritter von Trapp (bet-
ter known as the Baron in the Sound of Music), commanding the
U-5, succeeded in torpedoing and sinking the armored cruiser Leon
Gambetta, with heavy loss of life, on the night of 26 April 1915—
demonstrating once again the vulnerability of surface vessels in
these conﬁned waters. After Italy entered the war, the situation re-
mained much the same. In the face of the threat posed by sub-
marines, heavy ships could not operate effectively in the A d r i a t i c ,
and operations became largely a quasi-guerrilla war in which the
Austrian submarines, reinforced by small German U-boats trans-
ferred overland, played a major role.
Germany began transferring submarines to the Mediterranean
theater in May 1915, when it became clear that the limited A u s-
trian submarine force could do little to affect operations in the
area, despite their effectiveness in the Adriatic. They scored some
considerable successes on arrival. Kapitänleutnant Otto Hersing,
commanding the U - 2 1 , torpedoed and sank the British pre-
dreadnought battleship Tr i u m p h at the Dardanelles on 25 May and
a n o t h e r, the M a j e s t i c , two days later. Two smaller submarines,
h o w e v e r, proved very much less effective, and subsequent German
submarine operations during the Dardanelles campaign proved
largely inconsequential.
The German Navy continued to send U-boats to the Mediter-
ranean, sending the smaller boats overland by rail for assembly at
Pola and passing the larger boats through the Straits of Gibraltar.
One early arrival, the UB-15, commanded by Oberleutnant zur See
von Heimburg, sank the Italian submarine Medusa in the Adriatic on20 S U B M A R I N E S

1 June 1915. Von Heimburg, now commanding the U B - 1 4 , t h e n
sank the Italian armored cruiser Amalﬁ on 7 July, before sailing into
the Mediterranean.
The Mediterranean theater was attractive because there were
clearly deﬁned focal points through which much trafﬁc had to pass.
It obviously was crucial for French and Italian traffic, and much
British shipping sailed through the sea. The weather would permit
operations during the fall and winter, when it could hamper Atlantic
operations, and it also was much less probable that problems would
arise with the United States, since few U.S. ships or passengers
sailed through.
The German submarine campaign in the Mediterranean began in
earnest in October 1915. The submarines used Austrian bases at Po l a
and Cattaro for their operations. During that month five large U-
boats sank 63,848 tons of shipping—more than three-quarters of all
merchant vessel sinkings in all theaters. More large and small boats
reinforced the Mediterranean ﬂotilla, with merchant shipping losses
reaching 152,882 tons in November and 76,693 tons in December.
During 1916 the U-boat campaign in the Mediterranean contin-
ued its successes. The ﬁrst quarter of the year saw losses decline as
the U-boats underwent reﬁts, contended with winter weather, and
were subject to restrictions on attacking passenger liners. Neverthe-
less, losses were high enough to lead the Allies to strengthen their
patrol systems and divert as much shipping as possible from sailing
through the Mediterranean, even though that extended voyages and
tied up vessel capacity. New boats arriving from Germany and exist-
ing boats returning to service pushed merchant shipping losses in
the Mediterranean for the second quarter of 1916 to 192,225 tons,
about half of all losses in all theaters. These successes continued
into the summer and fall, as German U-boats sank 321,542 tons of
shipping between July and September. Nor was there any real relief
in the fall and early winter, since a further 427,999 tons of shipping
went down by the end of the year. In aggregate, German U-boats
sank well over a million tons of shipping during 1916, while losing
only two submarines, one of which sank after running into one of its
own mines.
The beginning of 1917 brought the illusion of calm, as most of
the German U-boats were reﬁtted. Losses fell to 78,541 tons in Jan-
uary, before rising again to 105,670 tons in February and then drop-
ping to 61,917 tons in March. The Germans reinforced their
Mediterranean ﬂotilla, and new Austrian boats, based on the Ger-
man UB-II class, joined the German submarines in operations in theE A R LY SUBMARINES 21

central Mediterranean. Together they sank 277,948 tons of shipping
in April. The Allies were forced to reappraise their system of trade
protection and began introducing convoy of merchant shipping in
late May. Losses fell to 180,896 tons in May and 170,473 tons in
June. Even though the Germans increased their U-boat force by
more than 25 percent, losses continued to decline in July and Au-
gust, to 107,303 tons and 118,372 tons, respectively. An unprof-
itable diversion of U-boats in the fall to support operations in Syria
against the Allied offensive netted a few small warships but relieved
the pressure on merchant shipping. Success returned, however, as
the U-boats re-entered the campaign against merchant shipping in
December, at which time losses rose to 148,331 tons. Once again,
G e r m a n y ’s total U-boat loss for the year was two boats, while the
German and Austrian submarines sank well over 1.25 million tons of
shipping.
Finally in 1918, Allied efforts to protect trade bore fruit. During
the first six months of the year, German and Austrian submarines
sank about 600,000 tons of shipping, but their losses rose to ten
boats, twice their total losses for the previous three years. The sub-
m a r i n e s ’ success rate fell dramatically in the months before the
Armistice: they sank less than 250,000 tons of shipping and lost an
additional four boats in the process. Moreover, these diminished ac-
complishments came about despite the fact that almost twice as
many submarines were operational as in 1917.
Between 1915 and 1917, the German Navy operated a small
number of submarines in the Black Sea. The ﬁrst boats arrived in
May 1915 as part of Germany’s support for Turkey during the Dard-
anelles campaign. Most of the boats deployed were small UB- or
UC-type coastal submarines; their successes were very limited, al-
though their operations did cause the Russians to deploy their own
hunting squadrons of destroyers. The few larger submarines dis-
patched to the Black Sea had no greater success. In all, Germany
sent three large and about a dozen small submarines to the Black
Sea, losing almost half of them, mostly to mines.
In summation, then, the most important campaign in which the
submarines of the Central Powers engaged—their operations against
merchant shipping—came close to total success in April 1917, only
to fail completely to overcome the effectiveness of the convoy sys-
tem. In the process, however, they permanently redeﬁned the role of
the submarine in warfare.C H A P T E R T W O

A War-Winning Weapon?

The navies of the world now moved to focus their attention on
developing boats to serve in the roles of reconnaissance, offensive
patrols against enemy warships, and cooperation with the battle-
ﬂeet—all missions that had been envisaged prior to the outbreak of
World War I. They were motivated in particular by the accomplish-
ments of the Imperial German Navy’s submarine arm; the success
of Allied countermeasures in the later stages of the conﬂict and the
impending emergence of superior detection equipment; and a gen-
eral revulsion against the very idea of unrestricted submarine
warfare against merchant shipping. Navies in general sought to pro-
duce faster, stronger, more powerfully armed, and longer- r a n g e
boats to fulfill these tasks. The improved submarine types shared
many features. Functionally they were submersibles, rather than
true submarines; their designs were optimized for operation on the
surface, with only limited capabilities submerged. Underwater, they
relied for propulsion on electric motors fed by large storage batter-
ies; on the surface, they used diesel engines for propulsion and to
recharge the batteries. While they incorporated substantial batter-
ies of torpedo tubes and reload torpedoes, they also carried guns for
use against surface or aerial targets. Their operational range was a
function of their bunkerage for diesel fuel, while their submerged
radius of action was limited by battery cell capacity. Maximum sub-
merged speed usually was not much more than half of their surface
speed, and maintaining high submerged speeds was impossible for
any length of time without totally draining the batteries and forcing
the submarine to the surface. Consequently, most navies conceived
of operating their submarines primarily as stealthy surface vessels

2324 S U B M A R I N E S

with the ability to submerge for evasion or escape prior to or after
an attack.
German submarine designs exerted a major inﬂuence, either di-
rectly or indirectly, on most of the world’s submarine development in
the years between the two world wars—except in Britain and, to a
lesser extent, the Soviet Union. All the major navies of the victorious
Allies—Britain, France, Italy, Japan, and the United States—re-
ceived examples of the latest German U-boats under the terms of the
Armistice and the Treaty of Versailles. They intently examined and
analyzed these German craft to determine the applicability and suit-
ability of their features for incorporation into their own types and, in
several instances, commissioned former German submarines into
their own services to acquire operational experience in their use.
Both Italian and French designers were very much influenced by
studying and operating examples of the later Mittel-U and UB-III
types prior to developing their first new postwar boats. The big
U-cruisers had even more impact. The ﬁrst French oceangoing sub-
marines, the Requin class, beneﬁted substantially from their design-
ers’ study of U-cruisers. The big U.S. Navy ﬂeet boats owed a great
debt to the German boats (including even their diesel engines, in
some cases), and German engineers were intimately involved in the
development of the early Japanese kaidai and junsen types.
German design influence spread to lesser fleets too, largely
through the activities of the Ingenieurskantoor voor Scheepsbouw
(IvS). The IvS was established in July 1922 at Den Haag in The
Netherlands by a consortium of the Krupp and Vulcan shipbuilding
yards to circumvent the Versailles Treaty’s prohibition on submarine
design and construction. The engineering staff was led by Hans
Techel, who had headed Krupp’s submarine design team since 1907,
and the firm also received clandestine financial support from the
German Navy, which was desirous of maintaining German subma-
rine design expertise despite the treaty. IvS engineers produced sub-
marine designs that were constructed for Turkey, Finland, the Soviet
Union, Spain, and Sweden, and also served as prototypes for the
German Navy’s Type IIA coastal, Type IA long-range, and Type VII
oceangoing U-boats.
During the period between the two world wars, the world’s major
navies constructed small series of submarines that served the dual
purpose of meeting immediate operational needs and also providing
data for the development of improved vessels. By the mid-1930s
most of these navies had evolved one or two basic types apiece that
were well matched to their operational requirements, had attainedA WAR-WINNING WEAPON? 25

substantial design maturity, and were suited to large-scale series pro-
duction. In general, and with very few exceptions, the vast majority
of the submarines that served during World War II were of these
standardized types, modiﬁed in the light of operational experience,
rather than radically new designs.
The U.S. Navy took the process of type standardization the fur-
thest, entering World War II with a single basic design that was im-
proved but never replaced during the course of the conﬂict. These
“ﬂeet boats” emerged through the crystallization and synthesis of a
series of designs produced to meet requirements for fleet sub-
marines to accompany the battleﬂeet, cruiser submarines for long-
distance raiding, and patrol submarines for offensive operations in
the Paciﬁc. Nine vessels, essentially experimental prototypes, in ﬁve
classes were produced between 1921 and 1934, ranging in size from
1,100 to 2,700 tons standard (deﬁned by the Washington Treaty as
fully-equipped except for crew and fuel) on the surface. Overall
these submarines were not very successful, suffering problems with
their diesel machinery, diving ability, and general reliability, but they
provided valuable experience and data for an improved design.
The new series that began with the Porpoise class of 1934 were of
1,310 to 1,475 tons standard on the surface. They introduced diesel-
electric reduction drive, which proved vastly more reliable than pre-
vious arrangements. Surface cruising range was 11,000 miles at 10
knots, and they had a patrol endurance of 75 days. They could oper-
ate for up to 48 hours submerged at 2 knots and had a safe operating
depth limit of 250 feet. A battery of 6 to 8 torpedo tubes with 16 to
24 torpedoes was ﬁtted, along with a light deck gun. Between 1934
and 1940, 38 submarines of this group were constructed, and they
formed the backbone of the U.S. submarine force when the United
States entered World War II.
The G a t o class that followed became the first mass-produced
wartime class. Displacement rose to 1,526 tons, the torpedo tube
battery increased to 10 tubes, and safe depth increased to 300 feet.
They were followed by the very similar Balao class, which featured a
deeper safe operating depth of 400 feet, accomplished by substitut-
ing high-tensile steel for the mild steel used in earlier boats. The
Tench class introduced diesel-electric direct drive that brought about
a very signiﬁcant reduction in noise and internal machinery space,
leading to the addition of four reload torpedoes to the outﬁt. A total
of 221 submarines from these three classes were completed during
or immediately after World War II. Signiﬁcant wartime modiﬁcations
included reducing superstructure, adding radar, and enhancing the26 S U B M A R I N E S

gun armament by ﬁtting 4- or 5-inch deck guns and adding multiple
light antiaircraft weapons.
Japan also constructed very large submarines, intended to oper-
ate primarily as integral components of the battleﬂeet. The k a i d a i
type design was based on a large German cruiser submarine from
World War I; the type evolved into a series of 24 boats in five
classes, constructed between 1921 and 1935. These vessels dis-
placed between 1,390 and 1,635 tons standard, had operating
ranges of between 10,000 and 14,000 miles at 10 knots, carried a
battery of 6 to 8 tubes with 14 to 16 torpedoes, could operate sub-
merged for 36 hours at 2 knots, and had a safe operating depth of
between 200 and 250 feet. Japan, with considerable assistance from
German engineers, also developed very large cruiser submarines of
the j u n s e n type between 1924 and 1938. These eight huge vessels
had standard displacements of between 1,970 and 2,231 tons and
an operational range of 24,000 miles at 10 knots; they could dive
safely to 300 feet.
In 1939, Japan essentially standardized its large submarine type
with a vessel design displacing about 2,100 tons capable of cruising
for 14,000 miles at 16 knots, or 24,000 miles at 10 knots, and diving
to 330 feet. Three models were produced: a headquarters type em-
phasizing communications and command facilities, an attack type
emphasizing torpedo armament, and a scouting type that added
hangar space and a catapult for a small reconnaissance ﬂoatplane.
Some 46 of these large submarines were constructed, as well as
three others that brought together the facilities of all three types into
the sen-toku type, a single monster hull displacing 3,530 tons stan-
dard. Japan also constructed 10 final examples of the kaidai t y p e
early in World War II.
Unlike the United States, Japan also developed and constructed a
series of medium submarines intended for coastal work. In addition,
considerable effort was expended on midget submarines—small
boats with two-man crews intended for stealthy attacks on ports and
roadsteads after they had been transported close to the scene of op-
eration by larger submarines. Finally, late in World War II, Japan was
developing submarines with high underwater performance, but
these never entered service.
German submarines were developed clandestinely, inasmuch as
the Versailles Treaty prohibited them in the German Navy. Design
work, both at IvS and by the Blohm und Voss ﬁrm, continued for for-
eign navies with production undertaken in the customer’s yards un-
der German supervision. These boats also served as prototypes forA WAR-WINNING WEAPON? 27

domestic production, which made it possible for the ﬁrst new Ger-
man submarine, the U-1, to be completed on 29 June 1935, only ﬁve
weeks after the repudiation of the Versailles Treaty.
The overwhelming majority of the 1,150 U-boats commissioned
between 1935 and 1945 belonged to two groups: the so-called 500-
ton Type VII medium boats, and the 740-ton Type IX long-range
submarines. The Type VIIC actually displaced between 760 and
1,000 tons on the surface, had a cruising range of 6,500 to 10,000
miles at 12 knots on the surface and 80 miles at 4 knots submerged.
They had a battery of 5 torpedo tubes with 14 torpedoes, an 88mm
deck gun, and ever-increasing numbers of light antiaircraft weapons.
Almost 700 of these boats in all of their variants entered service dur-
ing World War II. The Type XIC actually displaced 1,120 tons; it had
a cruising range of 11,000 miles at 12 knots on the surface and 63
miles at 4 knots submerged. They had a battery of 6 torpedo tubes
with 22 torpedoes, a 105mm deck gun, and ever-increasing numbers
of light antiaircraft weapons. Almost 200 of this type and its variants
were commissioned.
Germany also commissioned a number of other important types
during World War II. Among the most important were the Type X
minelayers and the Type XIV supply boats. Both types operated as
resuppliers for the operational boats during the Battle of the A t-
lantic, providing fuel, provisions, medical supplies, reload torpedoes,
and even medical care and replacement crew members. Conse-
quently they became prime targets for Allied antisubmarine forces,
and few survived. The other major vessels were the radical Type XXI
and Type XXIII boats, designed for high submerged speed and ex-
tended underwater operation. Revolutionary streamlined hull
shapes, greatly increased battery space, and the installation of
snorkels allowed these boats to operate at submerged speeds that
made them very difficult targets for Allied antisubmarine forces.
Confused production priorities, however, and the general shortage of
materials late in the war prevented more than a very few from put-
ting to sea operationally.
British submarine development also was influenced by the
cruiser and ﬂeet submarine concepts, though the manifestation of
those ideas was almost entirely through evolution from designs ex-
isting at the end of World War I. The main thrust of early evolution
between the wars centered on the overseas patrol type, displacing
1,475 tons on the surface, with a range of 10,900 miles at 8 knots,
a submerged endurance of 36 hours at 2 knots, and a diving depth
of 500 feet. Armament included a battery of 8 torpedo tubes with28 S U B M A R I N E S

14 torpedoes and a 4-inch deck gun. A group of minelaying sub-
marines of similar size also were built, as well as a small series of
very fast large submarines for work with the ﬂeet. Both of those de-
velopments, however, proved very costly and of limited operational
u t i l i t y.
In the early 1930s a fresh start was made with the S w o r d f i s h
class, designed for offensive patrols in narrow waters. These boats
displaced 640 tons standard, had a cruising range of 3,800 miles at
9 knots on the surface and 36 hours at 3 knots submerged, and
could dive to 300 feet. Armament was 6 torpedo tubes with 12 tor-
pedoes and a 3-inch gun. A larger overseas patrol type, the Tr i t o n
class, appeared in 1937. These displaced 1,090 tons standard, had a
cruising range of 4,500 miles at 11 knots on the surface and 55
hours at 3 knots submerged, and could dive to 300 feet. A r m a m e n t
was 10 torpedo tubes with 16 torpedoes and a 4-inch gun. Britain
concentrated its production of submarines during World War II on
these two types, producing a total of 62 of the “S” type and 53 of
the “T” type.
Just before World War II the Royal Navy developed a small sub-
marine for training not only crews and new commanding ofﬁcers but
also antisubmarine vessels. When war came the design was quickly
adapted for operational use and proved particularly useful in con-
ﬁned waters such as the North Sea and Mediterranean. The U class
displaced between 540 and 646 tons on the surface. It had a range
of 3,600 miles at 10 knots on the surface, a submerged endurance of
60 hours at 2 knots, and a diving depth of 200 feet. Armament in-
cluded a battery of 6 torpedo tubes with 10 torpedoes and a 3-inch
deck gun. A total of 71 boats were constructed of this class and its
slightly improved successors of the V class. While they were useful
boats in the early part of the war, later examples diverted resources
from the construction of more effective vessels. Britain also con-
structed some 36 midget submarines, with four-man crews, for at-
tacks on shipping at anchor in harbor.
Italian submarines were of four basic types: very large oceango-
ing cruiser submarines, large minelayers, large long-range patrol
boats, and medium-size vessels. The cruisers, few in number,
proved rather unsuccessful, especially as they were slow to dive;
they saw little operational service. The minelayers, however, were
much more successful. They displaced between 1,054 and 1,305
tons standard on the surface, with a range of 8,500 miles at 9 knots
on the surface, a submerged endurance of 60 hours at 2 knots, and
a diving depth of 330 feet. Armament included a battery of 6 toA WAR-WINNING WEAPON? 29

8 torpedo tubes with 8 to 14 torpedoes, 36 mines, and one or two
3-inch deck guns.
The two series of patrol submarines emerged as essentially stan-
dard designs immediately before World War II began. The larger
group displaced between 920 and 1,000 tons standard on the sur-
face, with a range of 9,000 miles at 8 knots on the surface, a sub-
merged endurance of 60 hours at 2 knots, and a diving depth of 330
feet. Armament included a battery of 8 torpedo tubes with 12 torpe-
does and one 4-inch deck gun. The smaller group displaced between
650 and 680 tons standard on the surface, with a range of 5,000
miles at 8 knots on the surface, a submerged endurance of 60 hours
at 2 knots, and a diving depth of 330 feet. Armament included a bat-
tery of 6 torpedo tubes with 12 torpedoes and one 4-inch deck gun.
These smaller patrol submarines were very successful boats, per-
forming well in the shallow, clear waters of the Mediterranean; the
larger boats performed quite effectively in the Atlantic.
France constructed three series of submarines in the period be-
tween the wars: large, oceangoing, long-range vessels for worldwide
service and for operation with the ﬂeet; smaller boats for offensive
patrols in European waters; and a successful group of minelayers.
The 31 large submarines of the Redoutable class were generally re-
garded as very effective boats. They displaced 1,384 tons standard
on the surface, with a maximum range of 10,000 miles at 10 knots
on the surface and a submerged endurance of 60 hours at 2 knots.
They had a battery of 11 torpedo tubes (seven of them in two re-
mote-controlled, trainable external mounts), with a total of 13 torpe-
does and a single 3.9-inch deck gun. The series of smaller patrol
submarines began with 12 boats of the “600-tonne” type, followed
by 30 of an improved “630-tonne” model, several of which were still
incomplete when France fell in June of 1940. They had a range of
4,000 to 5,600 miles at 10 knots on the surface, an underwater en-
durance of 48 hours at 2 knots, and a safe operating depth of 330
feet. The torpedo battery comprised 9 tubes (three in an external, re-
mote-controlled trainable mount) with a total of 9 torpedoes, plus a
single 3.9-inch deck gun. The minelayers displaced 761 tons, could
cruise for 7,000 miles at 10 knots on the surface, had a submerged
endurance of 48 hours at 2 knots, and could safely operate to a
depth of 250 feet. They carried 5 torpedo tubes (three in a trainable
external mount) with 7 torpedoes, 32 mines, and a single 3-inch
deck gun.
The French Navy also operated the largest submarine in the
world between the two world wars. The Surcouf was designed for30 S U B M A R I N E S

long-range commerce war and displaced 2,880 tons standard on the
surface, had a range of 10,000 miles at 10 knots on the surface and
60 hours at 2 knots submerged, and could operate safely at 250
feet. The S u r c o u f’s battery included no fewer than 12 tubes (eight
in external mounts) with 22 torpedoes, two 8-inch guns in a special
turret mounting, and a seaplane stowed in a hangar and launched
with a catapult. The S u r c o u f was also equipped with a special com-
partment to accommodate prisoners taken from intercepted vessels
and a small motor launch to transport boarding parties. The subma-
rine proved to be successful in peacetime but never operated as de-
signed during combat because of the fall of France and the boat’s
subsequent loss in a collision.
Soviet production of new submarines began in 1927. Clandestine
cooperation with Germany gave Soviet engineers access to design
data for German types from late World War I: minelayers, Type UB-
III, and Mittel-U. The Soviets salved and recommissioned the
sunken British submarine L-55, which gave them access to late-war
British design information. Soviet designers also gained considerable
data from rehabilitating the later czarist-era Bubnov-designed boats
and the final examples of the ubiquitous Holland H-type sub-
marines. Synthesizing this information permitted the Soviets to pro-
duce a wide variety of submarines on a large scale. There were two
basic series of “M”-type coastal submarines, two basic medium sub-
marine series—the “Shch” or Pike type of indigenous origin (though
strongly inﬂuenced by British practice), and the later “S”-type de-
rived from the same basic design as the German Type VII, minelay-
ers of the “L”-type developed from the L-55, and long-range boats of
the “K”-type. At the outbreak of World War II in September 1939,
the Soviet Union deployed the world’s largest submarine force, with
168 boats in service.
The ﬁnal “M”-type displaced 283 tons surfaced, had a range of
4,500 miles at 8 knots on the surface or 36 hours at 3 knots sub-
merged, could dive to 295 feet, and had a battery of 2 torpedo tubes
with 4 torpedoes and a 45mm antiaircraft gun. The developed
“S”-type displaced 856 tons surfaced, had a range of 9,500 miles at
9 knots on the surface or 45 hours at 3 knots submerged, could dive
to 330 feet, and had a battery of 6 torpedo tubes with 12 torpedoes
and a 4-inch deck gun. Their indigenous rivals displaced 587 tons,
had a range of 3,650 miles at 7 knots or 50 hours at 2.5 knots
submerged, could dive to 295 feet, and carried 6 torpedo tubes with
10 torpedoes. The minelayers displaced 1,108 tons, had a range of
10,000 miles at 8.6 knots or 60 hours at 2.5 knots submerged,A WAR-WINNING WEAPON? 31

could dive to 330 feet, and carried 8 torpedo tubes with 14 torpe-
does and 20 mines. The “K”-type were very popular with their crews
and were regarded as the best Soviet submarines of World War II.
They displaced 1,480 tons, had a range of 15,000 miles at 9 knots
or 50 hours at 2.5 knots submerged, could dive to 330 feet, and car-
ried 10 torpedo tubes with 24 torpedoes. Despite this variety, the
Soviet Union’s yards produced large numbers of submarines during
World War II, completing some 200 boats during the course of the
c o n ﬂi c t .

ALLIED SUBMARINE OPERAT I O N S
IN WORLD WAR II

In most navies prior to World War II, the principal missions of sub-
marines were offensive operations against enemy warships and re-
connaissance. Britain, France, The Netherlands, and the United
States, in particular, deployed many of their long-range boats in the
Far East as counters to the powerful Imperial Japanese Navy con-
centrated there. A secondary task was campaigning against enemy
merchant shipping, within the limits permitted by the Prize Regula-
tions of the 1909 Declaration of London, which required ensuring
the safety of ships’ crews.
For the ﬁrst year of the war, Allied submarines operated predomi-
nantly in their primary prewar roles, undertaking patrols in the
North Sea, Atlantic, and Mediterranean to find and attack enemy
warships, with generally limited success. They also undertook a cam-
paign against the German merchant ﬂeet’s attempt to return to its
homeland, with mixed results. In September 1940, however, the Ad-
miralty lifted almost all restrictions on submarine operations against
enemy merchant shipping, setting the stage for a sustained cam-
paign against German and Italian trade.
Norwegian and Swedish ore trafﬁc formed Germany’s most impor-
tant European trade, and their protection became the principal fo-
cus of the navy’s trade protection efforts throughout the war. After
the successful German invasion of Norway, the Kriegsmarine began
convoying merchant shipping along the Norwegian coast from late
in 1940. Convoys generally were small—three to six ships—escorted
by a few torpedo boats, trawlers, and light craft. British submarines
maintained a continuous effort against this trade for the remainder
of the war, both by attacking convoys with torpedoes and by laying32 S U B M A R I N E S

extensive mineﬁelds along the various routes they followed. After the
German assault on the Soviet Union, Soviet Northern Fleet sub-
marines initiated attacks on German shipping in northern Norway,
and they were soon joined by British submarines operating from
Kola Bay. Joint operations continued until 1944, when the British
crews were brought home and the submarines were passed to the
Soviet Navy. This assault against the northern Norwegian convoys
cost the Germans some 500,000 tons of shipping, a relatively negli-
gible amount, considering that annual trafﬁc was well in excess of 6
million tons.
Soviet submarines also threatened the Swedish ore trafﬁc. This
shipping was encouraged to keep within Swedish territorial waters as
far as possible, and was escorted for the ﬁnal leg behind the protec-
tion of defensive mineﬁelds and net barriers. During 1942 and 1943,
Soviet submarines succeeded in sinking only about twenty ships, to-
taling some 40,000 tons, out of more than 1,900 vessels in convoy
representing well over 5.6 million tons of shipping. During 1944 the
Soviet army’s advances and the defeat of Finland meant that aircraft
played a greater role in antishipping operations, but, even so, Ger-
man losses remained relatively light. The collapse of German posi-
tions on the Baltic coast early in 1945 required the evacuation by
sea of more than 2 million troops and refugees. Despite some spec-
tacular successes—the sinking of the liners Wilhelm Gustloff (with
some 9,300 casualties), General Steuben (when only 300 survived of
the 4,000 passengers embarked), and Goya (with but 183 survivors
from among the more than 7,000 passengers and crew)—Soviet at-
tacks were remarkably ineffective, the Germans losing only about
thirty ships totaling some 100,000 tons. Overall, the Allied subma-
rine campaign against German shipping was both relatively ineffec-
tive and costly (sixteen Allied and more than forty Soviet submarines
were lost): it faced strong and effective countermeasures, especially
very efﬁcient radio direction ﬁnding and relatively powerful convoy
escorts, and it was conducted in conﬁned coastal waters that eased
the defender’s task.
When Italy entered the war in June 1940, British submarines, in
conjunction with surface warships and aircraft, commenced an in-
terdiction campaign against convoy trafﬁc carrying supplies to Ital-
ian forces in Libya almost immediately. Italian convoys generally
were small—three to six merchant vessels—with two or three escort-
ing destroyers or torpedo boats. As British surface forces operating
from Malta began attacking Libya-bound shipping, the Italian Navy
had to deploy heavier covering forces, often including cruisers, toA WAR-WINNING WEAPON? 33

support particularly valuable convoys. In this struggle over shipping,
the British possessed two great advantages: radar, which vastly en-
hanced the night-attack capabilities of its aircraft and surface ships;
and signals intelligence, which consistently gave them advance con-
voy routing information. Axis fortunes in this campaign ﬂu c t u a t e d
greatly. From mid-1941, Axis forces in North Africa required approx-
imately 100,000 tons of supplies each month. In March 1942, for
example, only 47,588 tons got through, whereas in April, 150,389
tons arrived. Overall, the Italian and German navies succeeded in
bringing about 80 percent of all convoyed shipping in the Mediter-
ranean through to its destination, losing two cruisers and seven de-
stroyers to submarines in the process, while Axis antisubmarine
forces and mines destroyed more than forty-ﬁve Allied submarines
during the course of the campaign.
By far the most successful Allied submarine campaign during
World War II was that of the U.S. Navy’s boats in the Paciﬁc against
Japanese merchant shipping and warships. The effort got off to a
mediocre start, not least because the early loss of the Philippines
forced U.S. submarines to traverse long distances from either
Hawai’ian or Australian bases to reach their targets. In addition,
Australian bases initially lacked adequate facilities, U.S. torpedoes
were highly unreliable and required major attention to correct their
deficiencies, and fleet doctrine required submarines to prioritize
their efforts against Japan’s major warships. It took time to ﬁx these
problems: bases in Australia were not adequately equipped until the
fall of 1942; it was June 1943 before destroying Japan’s merchant
ﬂeet became a doctrinal priority; and the torpedo problem was not
corrected until October of 1943. During this time, however, the
Paciﬁc Fleet was able to commission modern boats, upgrade existing
vessels, and substantially improve the quality of its submarine
commanders.
Japan began the Pacific War with 6,150,000 tons of merchant
shipping. New construction and captures added 832,000 tons during
1942. U.S. (and small numbers of British and Dutch) submarines
sank 620,600 tons of Japan’s total merchant shipping losses of
1,065,000 tons during that year. During 1943, Japan added 878,000
tons of new merchant shipping to its fleet, but U.S. submarines
alone sank 1,340,000 tons; another 441,000 tons were lost to other
factors (air and surface attack and maritime hazards).
Despite its direct experience of successful convoy operations by
its destroyers in the Mediterranean during World War I, the Imperial
Japanese Navy was very slow to introduce convoying of merchant34 S U B M A R I N E S

shipping after the Paciﬁc War began. The navy possessed very few
suitable escort vessels at the outbreak of the war, but that simply re-
ﬂected the overwhelming emphasis it placed on planning for the de-
cisive ﬂeet action that was the centerpiece of its operational strategy.
J a p a n ’s response to the burgeoning unrestricted submarine cam-
paign by the United States against its shipping was to increase ag-
gressive surface and air patrols and to continue to eschew defensive
convoy of its trafﬁc. Not until the end of 1943, when its merchant
ﬂeet was being devastated by U.S. submarines, did the navy begin
convoying shipping on a limited scale—especially the crucial tankers
bringing fuel from the Dutch East Indies.
The Paciﬁc Fleet responded by introducing the wolf-pack tactics
that had served German U-boats so well in the Atlantic. In particu-
l a r, coordinated night attacks by surfaced submarines relying on
guidance from sophisticated radar proved devastating. As a result,
1944 was a catastrophic year for Japan’s merchant fleet. Even
though Japanese shipbuilders launched 1,735,000 tons of new mer-
chant shipping, U.S. submarines sank 2,430,000 tons, and Japan
lost a further 1,550,000 tons to other causes. Shortage of targets
and a highly successful aerial mining campaign in Japanese home
waters cut the successes of U.S. submarines during 1945 to 400,000
tons of shipping, but the net outcome of the campaign was to all but
paralyze Japan’s maritime transportation system.
Overall, U.S. submarines accounted for two-thirds of all of Japan’s
losses of merchant ships, some 4.8 million tons, as well as one-third
of its warship casualties. The price of this success was high. Despite
the generally low level of effectiveness of Japanese antisubmarine
measures, ﬁfty submarines and 3,500 crewmen were lost during the
campaign, a little more than one-ﬁfth of all that undertook opera-
tional missions.

AXIS SUBMARINE OPERAT I O N S
IN WORLD WAR II

The outbreak of World War II found the German submarine arm
well trained but deﬁcient in numbers. From the moment of its re-
establishment, the submarine force had concentrated much of its ef-
fort on validating Kommodore Karl Dönitz’s concepts for an all-out
assault on enemy trade using concentrated groups of submarines
under central shore-based control to locate and destroy convoyedA WAR-WINNING WEAPON? 35

shipping, primarily through surfaced night attacks (wolf-pack tac-
tics). Dönitz was promoted Konteradmiral in October 1939, but
shortages of U-boats, Adolf Hitler’s initial insistence on Germany’s
adherence to the Prize Regulations, and demands on the submarine
force for its support of surface naval operations prevented him from
exploiting the potential of the wolf-pack tactics for most of the ﬁrst
nine months of the conﬂict. On average only six boats were at sea at
any one time during this period, forcing them to attack individually,
although some attempts were made to mount combined attacks
whenever possible.
As a result of its World War I experience after 1917, Britain was
quick to begin the convoying of merchant vessels. There was some
initial hesitation because of the feared detrimental effect that con-
voys could have on the efﬁcient employment of shipping, but when
the liner Athena was torpedoed and sunk without warning on 3 Sep-
tember 1939, Britain took this to indicate that Germany had com-
menced an unrestricted campaign of submarine warfare against
merchant vessels. Regular east coast convoys between the Firth of
Forth and the River Thames started on 6 September and outbound
transatlantic convoys from Liverpool two days later.
The conquest of Norway and the collapse of France in June 1940
brought substantial changes to the U-boat war against trade. From
French bases, German reconnaissance and long-range bomber air-
craft operated far into the Atlantic, while the operational range of
the U-boats sailing from Norway and French Biscay ports increased
d r a m a t i c a l l y. Italy’s simultaneous entry into the war terminated all
commercial traffic in the Mediterranean except for very heavily
escorted operational convoys bringing supplies into Malta. It also
substantially increased the number of submarines available for the
Atlantic campaign against shipping, inasmuch as Italian submarines
began operating from Biscay ports, effectively doubling the total Axis
force at sea. This situation allowed Dönitz to introduce his wolf-pack
tactic on a large scale into the Atlantic shipping campaign, just as
the British faced an alarming shortage of oceanic convoy escorts be-
cause of the neutralization of the French Fleet and their decision to
retain destroyers in home waters to guard against a German inva-
sion. The results vindicated Dönitz’s belief in the effectiveness of
wolf packs. In the first nine months of the war, German U-boats
sank a little more than 1 million tons of shipping, whereas they and
the Italians together destroyed more than 2.3 million tons between
June 1940 and February 1941. However, the release of destroyers
from their guard duties, the addition of new escorts, and the transfer36 S U B M A R I N E S

of ﬁfty obsolete destroyers from the U.S. Navy improved the situa-
tion. The dispersal point for westbound transatlantic convoys and
the pickup point for escort groups meeting eastbound shipping grad-
ually moved westward as the range of the escorts was increased. This
pushed the main arena of Axis submarine operations more toward
the mid-Atlantic zone, which reduced the time that boats could
spend on station. In mid-1941 the United States imposed its so-
called Neutrality Zone on the western Atlantic and began escorting
British convoys in conjunction with Royal Canadian Navy escorts,
operating from Argentia in Newfoundland. North Atlantic convoys
now were escorted throughout by antisubmarine vessels. Neverthe-
less, these additions to the escort force had only a limited impact on
losses, since German and Italian submarines succeeded in sinking a
further 1.8 million tons in the following nine months prior to the
U.S. entry into the war.
The German declaration of war on the United States on 10 De-
cember 1941 brought a major westward expansion of U-boat opera-
tions against shipping. A disastrous period followed, while the U.S.
Navy struggled with the problems of ﬁnding the escorts and crews
required to convoy the enormous volume of merchant trafﬁc along
the East Coast of the United States, and with the very concept of
convoy itself. Axis submarines sank more than 3 million tons of Al-
lied shipping between December 1941 and June 1942, well over 75
percent of it along the East Coast of the United States and Canada.
Nevertheless, by mid-1942 an elaborate and comprehensive system
of interlocking convoy routes and sailings was established for the
East Coast of North America and the Caribbean.
As Dönitz became aware of the extension of convoy along the
Atlantic East Coast, he shifted U-boat operations back to the mid-
Atlantic. His all-out assault on the North Atlantic convoy systems
i n ﬂicted heavy losses: between July 1942 and March 1943, Axis (al-
most entirely German) submarines destroyed more than 4.5 mil-
lions tons of Allied shipping, over 633,000 tons in March alone.
Nevertheless, new Allied countermeasures became available at this
crucial moment, and U-boat successes fell to 287,137 tons in A p r i l ,
237,182 tons in May, and only 76,090 tons in June. Dönitz’s reac-
tion was to deploy his U-boats in areas where Allied antisubmarine
forces were weak, anticipating that this would compensate for the
lack of success in the North Atlantic. Initially this plan to some
extent met his expectations, since sinkings rose to 237,777 tons in
J u l y, but the success of the Allied assault on U-boats in transit
to their patrol stations rendered the German accomplishmentA WAR-WINNING WEAPON? 37

transitory; merchant ship sinkings dropped to 92,443 tons in A u-
gust, never to surpass 100,000 tons per month at any subsequent
time during the war.
The collapse of the U-boat offensive in mid-1943 resulted from
the A l l i e s ’ concurrent deployment of a series of new countermea-
sures and technologies that reached maturity almost simultaneously:
centrimetric radar aboard both ships and aircraft, efﬁcient shipborne
high-frequency direction ﬁnding, ahead-throwing weapons that per-
mitted ships to fire antisubmarine bombs forward and thus retain
sonar contact, very-long-range shorebased antisubmarine aircraft,
escort carriers and escort support groups, and advances in decryp-
tion of German communications codes. The U-boat arm attempted
to defeat these countermeasures by deploying its own new weaponry,
the most important elements of which were radar warning receivers,
heavy antiaircraft batteries, and acoustic torpedoes designed to hunt
antisubmarines vessels. Not only did these fail to stem the tide of Al-
lied success against the U-boats, but new convoy communications
codes also defeated German cryptographers, rendering locating tar-
gets much more difﬁcult. Then, in 1944, Allied military successes in
France began to force German U-boats to make more extended pas-
sages to their patrol areas as their home ports moved farther from
the Atlantic; German air bases also ceased to give aircraft quick ac-
cess to British coastal waters.
During the final year of this conflict, U-boats equipped with
snorkels entered service. The production of new, fast e l e k t r o b o o t e
(the radical new Type XXI submarines with high underwater speed)
allowed the ﬁrst examples to become operational, but their numbers
were far too few to make any difference. Also, there were insufﬁcient
experienced crews available to exploit their potential. Such was the
success of Allied antisubmarine measures during this period that
full-scale convoying became unnecessary in some areas, and much
of the focus of their escorts turned to hunting U-boats rather than
directly protecting merchant shipping. The full measure of the de-
feat of the U-boats is indicated by the fact that more than two-thirds
of the 650 German submarines lost during World War II were sunk
in the last two years of the war.
Italian submarines were active in the North Atlantic and the
Mediterranean during World War II. In the North Atlantic they were
quite successful, sinking more than 500,000 tons of shipping during
about 180 patrols out of Bordeaux between mid-June 1940 and the
end of 1942. In the Mediterranean, however, their successes were
few and their losses high: they sank about 200,000 tons of shipping38 S U B M A R I N E S

during the course of more than 1,500 wartime patrols. That was
largely because of the Italian Fleet’s tactical doctrine, which envis-
aged using its submarines for daylight submerged attacks rather than
nighttime operations on the surface, as was the German practice.
The Imperial Japanese Navy saw submarines as an essential com-
ponent of its basic strategy for a Pacific war, the yogeki zengen
s a k u s e n (ambush-attrition operation). The purpose of all Japanese
auxiliary forces (originally all warships other than battleships, al-
though aircraft carriers later were given capital rank) was to wear
down an advancing U.S. Fleet as it crossed the Pacific, so that it
would be reduced in numbers and strength to a point that the main,
untouched Japanese Fleet could crush it in a decisive battle. Sub-
marines, therefore, operated almost exclusively as scouts and raiders
against warships of the U.S. Navy and rarely against even the ﬂeet
train, let alone merchant shipping. While some boats achieved spec-
tacular successes—such as the I-19’s salvo of four torpedoes on 15
September 1942, which sank the carrier Wa s p , damaged the de-
stroyer O’Brien so severely that it later sank, and forced the new bat-
tleship North Carolina to proceed to Pearl Harbor for repairs—most
operations were unproductive. Overall, the Japanese submarine
force was responsible for sinking about twenty warships and a little
more than 100 merchant vessels during World War II; it suffered
devastating losses itself.
Technology played a major part in determining the effectiveness
of submarines. Most navies encountered problems with their torpe-
does early on, especially those submarine arms that relied on mag-
netic rather than contact pistols. Radar development conferred a
special advantage on Allied submarines in particular, offsetting the
edge in optical quality possessed by German and Japanese vessels.
U.S. submarines were almost unsurpassed in their level of habitabil-
ity—they were almost the only boats that featured full air-condition-
ing and adequate space for their crews to sleep. Sonar developed
rapidly, as did countermeasures, while some navies put much effort
into stealth and self-defense measures by emphasizing the use of
wakeless electric torpedoes and special antiescort homing torpedoes.
The course of the submarine war demonstrated that those forces
that fell behind in the technological battle suffered disproportion-
ately heavily in combat.C H A P T E R T H R E E

The Advent of True
Submarines

During World War II the submarine’s principal roles were
commerce destruction and hunting enemy surface warships. The an-
tisubmarine forces of the United States and the British Common-
wealth comprehensively defeated the submarine campaigns of both
Germany and Japan against both merchant shipping and naval
forces with a combination of superior tactics and technologies. Nev-
ertheless, it was clear that new submarine technologies could poten-
tially negate this superiority. In particular, the advent of the German
Type XXI submarines, the e l e k t r o b o o t e , was especially worrying.
They combined high underwater speed, rapid maneuverability, sub-
stantial submerged endurance, deep diving, and long range without
needing to surface. These attributes resulted from the installation of
greatly enlarged batteries and more powerful electric motors in a
shorter, deeper, stronger, streamlined hull, and the use of snorkels to
operate the main diesel engines underwater. While the Type XXI did
not represent a mature technology, its potential was clear, and its de-
sign features powerfully influenced submarine development after
World War II, especially in the United States and the Soviet Union.
The advent of the Cold War forced a thorough reappraisal of the
role of submarines in the ﬂeets of the United States and its allies.
Maintenance of maritime commerce, the movement of troops, mu-
nitions, and equipment across the oceans to Europe and the Fa r
East, and the forward deployment of powerful naval surface forces,
centered mainly on aircraft carriers, all were vital components of the

3940 S U B M A R I N E S

West’s strategy for containing the Soviet Union and for conducting
operations should a war break out. The deployment of mature sub-
marines with the capabilities of the e l e k t r o b o o t e potentially could
jeopardize the West’s ability to undertake all three. One part of the
solution to countering fast, true submarines was the deployment of
fast, effective surface and aerial antisubmarine assets, but that ad-
dressed only containing and defeating submarines once they had
reached the open ocean. The other, and potentially more efﬁcient,
option was to deploy the West’s own submarines to hunt and kill en-
emy submarines before they could reach the oceans, and that there-
fore became one of the submarine’s primary missions.
The Soviet Union also had to re-evaluate the purpose of its sub-
marine force. One primary role quickly emerged: defending the na-
t i o n ’s coast and ports against attack through offensive operations
against the West’s surface maritime assets—especially carrier forces
and oceanic lines of communications—and defensive operations
against submarines attempting to prevent the egress of Soviet boats.
Both sides in the Cold War quickly came to view enemy submarines
as the primary target of their own boats, especially as both began de-
ploying submarines as platforms for strategic missile attack against
the other’s homeland; in addition, the Soviet Union also placed great
emphasis on offensive missions against the West’s carrier groups.
At the beginning of the Cold War, all operational submarines used
diesel-electric drive. This required submarines either to surface fre-
quently to recharge their batteries, or that they be equipped with a
snorkel breathing device. The initial primary focus of submarine de-
velopment, especially in the United States and the Soviet Union,
was the integration of experience from analyzing and operating the
German elektroboote into their ﬂeets.
The U.S. Navy took a three-track approach to this task. The ﬁrst,
l o n g e r-term approach was to explore new propulsion technologies
that would free submarines from the limitations of diesel-electric
drive; this led to the introduction of nuclear-powered boats. The sec-
ond was to develop new designs that embodied the principles of the
Type XXI boats within the framework of U.S. requirements. New
long-range submarines of the Ta n g class and short-range hunter-
killer types emerged, but their numbers fell far short of the ﬂeet’s re-
quirements. To a great extent, however, budgetary constraints forced
the U.S. Navy to pursue most vigorously the least attractive option:
modifying, through the GUPPY program, as much as possible of the
large existing fleet of new but obsolete submarines built during
World War II for greater speed and underwater endurance. LargeTHE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES 41

numbers of almost new G a t o , B a l a o , and Te n c h class fleet sub-
marines received more streamlined casings and sails, enlarged bat-
teries, snorkels, and improved sensors to suit them for submerged
operation for more extended periods.
The United States also undertook research on improved hull
forms for extended high-speed submerged operation, leading to the
construction of the experimental Albacore by the Portsmouth Naval
Shipyard in 1952–1953.
The A l b a c o r e was revolutionary: the hull was a teardrop shape,
optimized for underwater operation; there was a single propeller;
and the installation of a massive battery permitted very high sub-
merged speed, albeit for only short periods. The new hull form
demonstrated great maneuverability, and exploiting it led to sub-
stantial improvements in subsequent submarine control systems,
making them more akin to ﬂying an aircraft than operating a boat.
The A l b a c o r e also was subject to many modiﬁcations, especially to
the stern, which eventually received an X-tail that increased overall
length to 210960; several different types of propeller and rudder
arrangements were tried, and the boat also tested new configura-
tions for sonar installations.
The new shape demonstrated by the A l b a c o r e quickly found its
way into operational submarine service, both for diesel boats and for
n u c l e a r-powered submarines, in the United States and elsewhere.
Its wide adoption marked the completion of the process of transfor-
mation from submersible surface craft to full submarines. In the
United States it found its principal application in the development of
nuclear-powered boats; only the three diesel-electric submarines of
the Barbel class took advantage of its characteristics.
The Soviet Union followed a somewhat different course in devel-
oping its new submarine ﬂeet. In many ways it was far more conser-
vative, from a design standpoint. Essentially, it chose to integrate the
principles of the elektroboote into the design of updated iterations of
the existing three basic types: coastal, medium-range, and long-
range boats. Unlike the United States, the Soviet Union put these
new designs into mass production, building 32 coastal Project 615
( N ATO-designated Quebec) boats, more than 200 Project 613
( N ATO-designated Whiskey) medium submarines, and 22 of the
long-range Project 611 (NATO-designated Zulu) type.
The Soviet Union also explored new submarine propulsion tech-
nologies and adopted nuclear power some four years after the
United States. Unlike the United States, however, the Soviet Union
did not end production of conventionally powered submarines,42 S U B M A R I N E S

Large numbers of new diesel-electric Project 633 (NATO-designated
Romeo) and Project 641 (NATO-designated Foxtrot) boats, again of
relatively conservative design, were built to supplement the earlier
Project 613 and Project 611 types. Both types nevertheless were
successfully exported to countries within the Soviet sphere of inﬂu-
ence and laid the basis for conventional submarine production in
both China and North Korea.
The Soviets in addition saw a role for conventionally powered sub-
marines in the anticarrier mission, manifested in the production of
the Project 651 (NATO-designated Juliett) and Project 641BUKI
( N ATO-designated Tango) boats in the 1960s and 1970s, whose
principal weapons were antiship cruise missiles. The earlier type saw
operational characteristics on the surface take pride of place, inas-
much as it had to surface to launch its missiles and needed stability
for that purpose. The missiles of the later boats were launched while
it was submerged, and consequently a modiﬁed form of the earlier
Project 641 attack submarine hull was found satisfactory.
The Royal Navy took a somewhat different approach to new sub-
marine production immediately after World War II. Alone among Al-
lied navies, it had direct experience in creating submarines with high
underwater speed during the war, having converted several S class
boats into high-speed targets for antisubmarine forces. It used that
experience, plus additional information derived from study of the
German e l e k t r o b o o t e , to generate its own conversion program to
build up a force of fast boats from recently completed T and A class
submarines, while working to make more radical propulsion tech-
nologies reach production maturity.
The Admiralty looked into nuclear propulsion but decided to ex-
ploit the German Walther close-cycle turbine system for its non–air
breathing submarines, because it seemed less expensive and closer
to being ready for service. Unfortunately, British experts were under
the impression that German technicians who had tested this system
in a small number of experimental platforms were much closer to
solving all of its problems than was really the case. The Royal Navy
built two special experimental boats, the Explorer and the Excalibur,
as platforms to bring the Walther system to production status; in the
meantime, they built new conventional submarines that, while very
reliable and generally quite effective, did not represent much of an
advance on the conversions of wartime boats or the German elektro-
boote. The failure of the work in developing a mature Walther system
left the Royal Navy no alternative but to turn to the United States
for nuclear power technology when the time came for it to build itsTHE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES 43

own submarines that would be free from the limitations of diesel-
electric propulsion.
In the early 1980s the Soviet Fleet introduced a new convention-
ally powered attack submarine, in large part because it was easier
to create a quiet diesel-electric boat. The Project 877 (NAT O -
designated Kilo) type was specifically designed for antisubmarine
warfare and combined a teardrop hull form with a powerful sensor
suite and stringent measures to reduce acoustic and magnetic signa-
tures. These relatively large, conventionally powered boats proved
very successful. They were among the quietest boats of their era and
also became a considerable export success, both in their original
form and as the upgraded Project 636 (also designated Kilo by
NATO).
For most other nations the leap to nuclear power for submarines
was out of the question, because of the absence of the necessary in-
dustrial and scientiﬁc infrastructure, its great expense, and, in some
instances, political obstacles. Instead, they exploited the elektroboote
technologies to produce a new ﬁrst generation of Western, conven-
tionally powered fast submarines.
The second generation of postwar diesel-electric boats repre-
sented a substantial advance on the earlier types. Three elements
combined to create these new boats: great strides in battery technol-
ogy, new hull forms inspired by the Albacore design, and advances in
reducing acoustic and magnetic signatures. New battery designs not
only generated more power for the same space and weight but also
recharged much faster, enabling submarines to operate fully sub-
merged for longer periods and use their snorkel on a much more lim-
ited scale. New hull forms, and advances in metallurgy, endowed
these boats with higher speed, greater maneuverability, and deeper
diving capabilities. Reduced magnetism came from using nonmag-
netic, high-tensile steel or active demagnetizing. The biggest asset,
h o w e v e r, that these later-generation diesel-electric boats possessed
was quietness and, therefore, stealth. Rafted machinery, slow-speed
motors, advanced propeller designs, sophisticated streamlining, and
anechoic hull coatings all dramatically reduced their acoustic signa-
tures. When combined with their small size, especially relative to
nuclear-powered submarines, and thus an ability to operate in con-
ﬁned waters, this stealth made later diesel-electric boats very difﬁ-
cult targets for aerial, surface, and subsurface antisubmarine forces.
Several producers of advanced conventional boats were able to
turn these assets into lucrative export production. Beginning in the
1970s, France, Sweden, and above all Germany began to dominate44 S U B M A R I N E S

the market for advanced conventionally powered submarines world-
wide. The most successful by far is the family of German Type 209
submarines, of which almost 60 have been delivered or are on order
for 15 nations. Moreover, since many of these export boats were
ordered by ﬂeets without solid experience of modern submarine op-
erations, lucrative training and support contracts often accompany
the orders for the hardware, and contribute to the spread of a re-
markably uniform ethos of operation.

AIR-INDEPENDENT PRO P U L S I O N

From the very early days of modern submarine development in the
late 1800s, designers have been interested in developing means
whereby submarines could operate for extended periods without
having to return to the surface, relying instead on propulsion sys-
tems that simultaneously could operate independent of an air supply
and were functional for an extended period of time. There were a
number of experiments with operating internal-combustion engines
from an onboard oxygen supply in the Italian and Russian fleets
around 1900, but none were very successful and all encountered
substantial safety issues.
In the late 1930s, Helmuth Walter, an engineer with the Germa-
nia submarine construction ﬁrm, began exploring a variety of options
for closed-cycle machinery aboard submarines. His initial idea
contemplated using diesel engines running on oxygen created by
breaking down high-test hydrogen peroxide, but he moved from that
concept to exploiting the production of steam from the same source
to drive a turbine. In his process, hydrogen peroxide was broken
down in a catalyzer into steam and oxygen. They both passed into a
combustion chamber, were mixed with water and diesel fuel, and
were ignited to produce steam at a very high temperature and pres-
sure to drive a turbine. The exhaust went to a condenser where the
water was condensed and passed back into the system and the waste
gases were expelled overboard. This lightweight plant was demon-
strated in a series of experimental prototypes that ran trials between
1940 and 1944 and led to the production of a very small number of
potentially operational boats using the same type of machinery.
Only three boats of Type XVII were completed, and they were scut-
tled at the end of World War II. Two were recovered, however, going to
the United States and Britain for trials. The United States did notTHE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES 45

foresee a service application for Wa l t e r ’s system, but the Royal Navy,
which commissioned its boat as the M e t e o r i t e , saw the hydrogen per-
oxide turbine as a less expensive alternative to nuclear power that also
had the potential to enter ﬂeet service more quickly. In that expecta-
tion it was to be disillusioned, since the Walter turbine system was far
from ready for operational use; the Royal Navy’s many troubles with
its experimental prototypes, the E x p l o r e r and the E x c a l i b u r, s e r i o u s l y
set back work on developing air-independent propulsion systems.
Interest in such powerplants lingered, and it revived signiﬁcantly
in the 1980s, when very effective stealthy diesel-electric boats be-
came a signiﬁcant part of the world’s submarine ﬂeet. The ﬁrst such
successful system was developed by the Swedish Kockums company,
and, like all modern AIP plants, it is an add-on system: a module that
can be inserted into an existing submarine design. The Kockums AIP
system uses a Stirling engine that burns oxygen and diesel fuel in a
pressurized combustion chamber. Oxygen is carried in liqueﬁed form
in tanks. It is mixed in the chamber with diesel fuel from the boat’s
bunkers, and exhaust gases are mixed with seawater and discharged
overboard. The engine drives a generator that is used to power the
main electric motors and also to recharge the submarine’s batteries.
This system adds about 25 feet to the submarine’s length. It is very
quiet and almost vibration free, has a very low infrared signature,
and enables the boat to operate for 14 to 18 days without having to
use its snorkel to recharge its batteries.
France developed its MESMA (Module d’Energie Sous-Marin Au-
tonome) system using a Rankine-cycle turbo-alternator running on
steam produced by the combustion of ethanol and oxygen. Liquid
oxygen and ethanol are combined in a combustion chamber at a
pressure of 60 psi; the steam is passed through the turbine, and the
exhaust is expelled overboard. Operating the system does not in-
crease the submarine’s acoustic signature. It has a low infrared sig-
nature, and it is potentially more powerful than the Stirling engine
system, but less efﬁcient in its fuel consumption.
A third AIP system uses a closed-cycle diesel engine. When
switched to the closed-cycle mode, the engine operates using an arti-
ﬁcial atmosphere synthesized from oxygen, an inert gas such as ar-
gon, and recycled exhaust products. The exhaust passes through
coolers and scrubbers that separate out the argon and a small part of
the other gases and mixes the rest with seawater for discharge over-
board. Although this is potentially the simplest system to install, it
has been tested in only one boat and has yet to be used in an opera-
tional submarine.46 S U B M A R I N E S

The final AIP system currently employed uses fuel cells. Both
Howaldtswerke-Deutsche Werft and Fincantieri are offering such
systems, which essentially insert modular banks of fuel cells into the
submarine to generate the power for its electric motors. This instal-
lation adds about 20 feet to the length of the boat. It has the advan-
tage of generating no waste products for discharge overboard, and its
modularity makes it attractive because the cells can be installed
shoreside without requiring special handling.
Air-independent propulsion is still largely in its infancy in diesel-
electric submarines. No system’s power output is yet sufficient to
allow it to become the primary powerplant for a submarine, so all op-
erate as supplements to the standard installation, permitting the
boat to operate for two to four weeks without requiring an external
air source but not bestowing the unlimited submerged operation of a
nuclear plant.

NUCLEAR PRO P U L S I O N

At the beginning of the Cold Wa r, all operational submarines used
diesel-electric drive. This required submarines either to surface fre-
quently to recharge their batteries or that they be equipped with a
snorkel breathing device to operate their diesel engines while under
w a t e r. New approaches to the design of conventional submarines—
such as the German Type XXI e l e k t r o b o o t e , which greatly increased
submerged range and speed mainly by tripling the size of the battery—
were clearly only temporary substitutes for ﬁnding power plants that
were not dependent on an external air supply for continuous opera-
tion. The Walter turbine, powered through the breakdown of hydro-
gen peroxide, had potential, but it too suffered from limitations. Its
operation was hazardous, the technology was immature, and it had a
voracious appetite for fuel, severely limiting the duration of a subma-
rine deploying the plant.
The physicist George Pegram, at a specially convened meeting
on 17 March 1939, suggested to the U.S. Navy that a suitable nu-
clear fission chamber could be used to generate steam for a subma-
rine power plant; three days later, the Naval Research Laboratory
was granted $1,500 to begin research into its feasibility. The out-
break of war and the concentration of the nation’s nuclear physi-
cists on the creation of an atomic bomb sidelined further work
until late in 1944, when it resumed. Serious research into nuclearTHE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES 47

power for submarines, which promised essentially unlimited high-
speed submerged operation, began immediately after World War II,
leading to the establishment of the Nuclear Power Branch, headed
by Captain Hyman G. Rickover, within the Bureau of Ships in A u-
gust of 1948. A Division of Reactor Development, also headed by
R i c k o v e r, in the Atomic Energy Commission, was inaugurated the
following Fe b r u a r y.
The U.S. Navy followed two tracks simultaneously in developing
reactors for use in submarines, developing units using either pres-
surized water or liquid sodium to transfer heat to the steam genera-
tors. Its ﬁrst submarine with a nuclear power plant was the Nautilus,
commissioned on 30 September 1954, although it was not underway
under nuclear power until 17 January 1955. The N a u t i l u s used a
pressurized water reactor, identical to a unit tested on land prior to
the installation of its power plant. It was a resounding technical suc-
cess, although it suffered from extraordinarily high noise levels that
made its deployment as an operational boat in wartime problematic.
The N a u t i l u s was followed by the S e a w o l f , powered by a liquid
sodium reactor, which commissioned on 30 March 1957. The navy
found that the liquid sodium reactor required detailed attention to
maintaining precise and limited operational parameters, and it de-
cided against further investment in its development. Instead, all re-
sources went into production and improvement of pressurized water
units.
The Soviet Union began research work on nuclear power plants
for submarines in 1946, but very little progress was made because of
the need to concentrate resources in the ﬁeld of nuclear energy on
the production of bombs, to break the U.S. monopoly on such
weapons. Consequently, it was not until 1952 that signiﬁcant effort
was devoted to the project, leading to the testing of a land-based pro-
totype beginning in March 1956. Construction of the Soviet Union’s
ﬁrst nuclear-powered submarine began with the laying of the keel
for the K-3 at the Molotovsk yard in September 1955. The boat was
launched on 9 August 1957 and commissioned on 7 January 1958.
Unlike the American Nautilus, the K-3 was the ﬁrst of a class of 13
boats of the Project 627 (NATO-designated November) type, which
also differed from U.S. practice in using two reactors for its power
plant. Their greater power output endowed them with higher per-
formance than their U.S. counterparts, but, like American nuclear
boats, they were very noisy.
The Soviet Union also explored the use of other media for
transferring heat to the steam generators, in this instance, liquid48 S U B M A R I N E S

lead-bismuth. Its first submarine powered by such a plant was the
K - 2 7 , built to Project 645, using the same hull design as the Pro-
ject 627 boats lengthened to accommodate the bulkier reactors.
The liquid metal, although less dangerous in the event of an acci-
dent than the sodium of the S e a w o l f’s plant, was somewhat less ef-
ficient as a heat exchanger and also required constant heat to keep
it from solidifying, leading to a requirement to either run the reac-
tor continuously or provide en external heat supply while the boat
was in port. Although initial trials were satisfactory, the K - 2 7 s u b-
sequently suffered a series of mechanical problems that led to its
early decommissioning; the experience, however, was not suffi-
cient to induce the Soviets to abandon lead-bismuth reactors im-
m e d i a t e l y.
With the advent of ballistic missile submarines, both the United
States and the Soviet Union sought to protect themselves from a ﬁr s t
strike at the hands of the other by developing fast, stealthy sub-
marines to intercept the ballistic missile boats, while simultaneously
endeavoring to preserve their own strike capability through defeating
the interceptors. Very quickly the principal target of attack sub-
marines became enemy submarines, and the demand for high speed,
m a n e u v e r a b i l i t y, and quiet operation led to the rapid adoption of the
hull form pioneered by the A l b a c o r e : the teardrop, or body-of-
revolution, shape. The Soviet Fleet introduced the remarkable tita-
nium-hulled, highly automated Project 705 (NATO-designated A l f a )
type into limited service. Powered by a single, very powerful lead-
bismuth reactor, these boats could safely dive as deep as 2,000 feet
and attain submerged speeds well in excess of 40 knots. The com-
plexity of their reactors, however, caused problems in service and ren-
dered them anomalies among the second-generation of attack boats:
the Soviet Fleet’s Project 671 (NATO-designated Victor) and the U.S.
N a v y ’s T h r e s h e r and S t u r g e o n classes became the most numerous and
characteristic nuclear-powered attack submarines of the Cold Wa r.
The Soviet Fleet also established a second requirement for its nu-
clear submarines, leading to the production of a series of specialized
boats equipped with cruise missiles with the dedicated mission of
tracking and, in the event of war, destroying the fast carriers of the
U.S. Navy. Initially these cruise missiles had to be launched from the
surface, so their platforms, the Project 675 (NAT O - d e s i g n a t e d
Echo-II) type, were optimized for stability on the surface. It was not
until the Project 670 class (NATO-designated Charlie-I) nuclear-
powered cruise-missile submarines that the Soviets developed the
capability to launch cruise missiles while submerged.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES 49

The third generation of attack and cruise-missile submarines were
the U.S. Los A n g e l e s class and the Soviet Type 971 boats (NAT O -
designated Akula). Both embody considerable advances in reducing
acoustic, magnetic, and infrared signatures, as well as greater opera-
tional ﬂexibility compared with their precursors. The end of the Cold
War, however, has curtailed their construction or operational deploy-
ment substantially.
Britain, France, and China all have deployed nuclear-powered at-
tack submarines, while India is working toward deploying such boats
in the not-too-distant future. Britain launched its first nuclear-
powered submarine, the attack-type Dreadnought on 21 October
1960. It used a U.S. nuclear power plant, enabling the British to
save both considerable time and money. Later British boats were ﬁt-
ted with British-built power plants, though these derived substan-
tially from U.S. prototypes. Under President Charles de Gaulle, the
French also built up a nuclear submarine force during the Cold War.
The French took a different path than the Americans, British, and
Soviets, however, in that they first built nuclear-powered ballistic
missile submarines rather than nuclear-powered attack submarines.
The country’s ﬁrst attack boats used power plants similar to those of
its ballistic missile submarines. The low ebb of relations between
France and the United States at the time meant that French design-
ers could not draw on U.S. assistance or expertise in developing their
nuclear reactors or submarine propulsion systems. Consequently,
French submarine reactors were heavier than their U.S. and British
counterparts. Their propulsion system also was very different, since
French designers elected to use turbo-electric drive rather than
steam turbines, and that preference has continued with the design
for the next generation of attack submarines for the ﬂeet, the Bar-
racuda class, scheduled to begin deploying in 2010.

Cold War Submarine Operations by the West

Three circumstances radically changed the paradigm of We s t e r n
submarine operators immediately after World War II: the Allies’ over-
whelming victory in that conﬂict, the transformation of the Soviet
Union from an ally into the We s t ’s preeminent opponent, and the
advent of true submarines—epitomized by the German Type XXI
boats, whose technology was readily accessible to all the erstwhile
allies. Countering the potential major threat fast submarines could
present to transatlantic and transpacific lines of communications50 S U B M A R I N E S

and to the free operation of Western surface task forces permeated
naval planning. Consequently, antisubmarine warfare, both defen-
sive and offensive, became the central focus of Western submarine
operations.
The limitations of existing boats, even after major modiﬁc a t i o n s
such as the GUPPY program in the U.S. Navy, and the constraints of
current propulsion technologies at ﬁrst entailed concentration on in-
terception. Submarines were deployed forward, ideally in close prox-
imity to Soviet naval bases or, if that was impractical, at “choke
points,” relatively tightly defined passages through which Soviet
boats would have to travel to reach their targets. Early hunter-killer
tactics relied on slow, stealthy boats using passive sonar and fire-
control equipment, but actual operations quickly demonstrated the
limited effectiveness of both the boats and their electronics.
The advent of nuclear-powered boats quickly changed the anti-
submarine warfare situation for Western submarines forces from
the 1960s. Their greater size provided space for very powerful sonar
o u t ﬁts whose capabilities ﬁnally came close to fulﬁlling the needs of
stealthy hunter-killer operations. Their vastly enhanced submerged
endurance made prolonged ambush deployments off Soviet bases or
at choke points a realistic option. Powerful sonar, speed, and en-
durance also opened up the possibility of maintaining continuous
submerged surveillance of Soviet submarines; an urgent require-
ment in the Cold War situation once the Soviet Union began de-
ploying strategic missiles aboard dedicated submarine platforms.
Furthermore, the submerged speed and endurance of nuclear boats
at last made feasible the long-running concept of ﬂeet submarines.
T h e y, however, did not take on the role of ambushers of enemy sur-
face forces (the original ﬂeet submarine concept) but rather oper-
ated as effective wide-ranging, stealthy escorts for important fast
surface task forces, especially those centered on carriers which had
become the principal targets of Soviet submarines. The operations
of British nuclear boats as distant escorts for the task force operat-
ing against the Falklands/Malvinas in 1982 vividly illustrated this
role; the sinking of the Argentinian cruiser General Belgrano on
2 May by HMS C o n q u e r o r and the subsequent self-blockade of A r-
g e n t i n a ’s carrier Veinticinco de Mayo in port thereafter clearly
demonstrated how effectively submarines could perform task force
escort missions.
Two developments further expanded the mission portfolio
of Western submarines: the use of submarine-launched cruise mis-
siles and the growth of the Soviet surface fleet. The addition ofTHE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES 51

cruise-missile launch capability to attack submarines enabled them
to perform land attack missions with great precision against narrowly-
d e ﬁned targets. During the 1990s submarine-launched punitive To m-
ahawk cruise missile strikes against facilities of speciﬁc importance
became the means of choice whereby the United States attempted to
reinforce its foreign policy decisions and retaliate against regimes and
organizations for attacks on U.S. citizens and assets. For example, on
20 August 1998 the United States launched Tomahawk missiles
against six terrorist bases in Afghanistan and a factory in Sudan sus-
pected of producing nerve gas in retaliation for the bombings of U.S.
embassies in Kenya and Tanzania on 7 August. The commissioning of
aircraft carriers into the Soviet Fleet also promptly revitalized the
submarine mission of surface warship attack, so that Western nuclear
boats took on the role of shadowing Soviet carrier forces that long
had been an important function of Soviet submarines.

Cold War Submarine
Operations by the Soviet Bloc

At the end of World War II the Soviet Union had the largest subma-
rine force in the world, although it was far from being the most
effective either in the quality of its equipment or its operators. The
onset of tensions with its erstwhile allies in Western Europe and
North America that led to the Cold War made containing the threat
of the West’s overwhelming naval preponderance, and especially its
carrier forces, a major Soviet military goal. Consequently, using as a
basis the captured German e l e k t r o b o o t e t e c h n o l o g y, the Soviet
Union rapidly built up a very large force of modern submarines
whose primary missions were intercepting and shadowing We s t e r n
carrier forces and, should a conflict occur, attacking the transat-
lantic shipping bridge that carried reinforcements and supplies from
North America to Europe.
A second mission quickly developed: countering Western sub-
marines that had adopted antisubmarine warfare as their primary
task. A dangerous cat-and-mouse game ensued that persisted
throughout the Cold War between Soviet and Western submariners,
primarily in the waters of the Arctic, North Atlantic, and Northwest-
ern Pacific oceans, and the Mediterranean Sea. The boats, their
equipment, their weapons, and their operators became ever more so-
phisticated but the objective remained the same: to secretly inter-
cept an opponent and maintain stealthy contact thereafter.52 S U B M A R I N E S

The deployment of Western ballistic missile submarines quickly
led the Soviet Navy to react in the same way as Western forces by de-
ploying its attack submarines for operations to locate and shadow
the missile boats from their departure from port throughout their
missions. Stealth, endurance, and sophisticated sonar and ﬁre con-
trol were crucial to the success of such operations, which persisted
throughout the Cold War and beyond to the present.
Anticarrier operations received a substantial boost in effectiveness
with the advent of fast nuclear boats armed with long-range anti-
shipping missiles. This development closely coincided with the de-
ployment of Soviet strategic missile submarines, whose survival in
the open waters of the Atlantic and Paciﬁc depended heavily on the
ability of Soviet attack boats to neutralize Western carriers and sub-
marines. This became even more important with the advent of long-
range ballistic missiles capable of targeting North America without
their launch platforms having to leave the relative safety of the Arc-
tic Ocean. The Soviet Navy developed the concept of “bastion
defense” in which its attack submarines and strong surface antisub-
marine forces would neutralize Western efforts to penetrate this
zone of safety with their boats while the Soviet anticarrier force
prevented U.S. carrier task forces from supporting penetration oper-
ations or initiating their own attacks on the strategic missile sub-
marines.
Throughout the Cold War attack submarines operated by all the
protagonists played a vital role. They were in the forefront of both
defensive and offensive operations, operating right off their oppo-
n e n t ’s bases, trailing both surface and submerged opposition
assets, and protecting their own forces from interception and pos-
sible attack.C H A P T E R F O U R

Strategic Missile
Submarines

The advent of atomic and nuclear weapons, the physical
distance between the two principal protagonists in the Cold Wa r,
the range limitations of existing and imminent missile technologies,
and concerns about the vulnerability of bomber aircraft led to the
investigation of the potential of submarines as launch platforms for
missiles. As the United States and the Soviet Union explored the
possibilities of this new submarine mission, the craft’s added
attractions—stealth, mobility, and relative invulnerability—became
more apparent, and it eventually came to occupy a position of at
least parity with land-based strategic missiles and clear superiority
over conventional bombers.
Because Germany was the first nation to deploy strategic mis-
siles, its experience and concepts played a noticeable role in the de-
velopment of U.S. and Soviet concepts. When Allied forces landed
in Normandy and advanced into northern France and Belgium, they
o v e r-ran the launching sites for Germany’s V-2 ballistic missiles.
The range limitations of the V-2 missile (approximately 185 miles)
had placed most targets in the United Kingdom beyond its strike ca-
pabilities, and attacks against the United States had clearly been far
beyond the bounds of possibility. Such considerations had led the
missile development staff at Peenemünde to study options for
launching ballistic missiles at sea. The solution they chose was a
self-contained canister, incorporating a launching platform, control
space, and propellant stowage, that could be towed by a submarine

5354 S U B M A R I N E S

to its firing position and water-ballasted upright for launch. Suc-
cessful shoreside testing of this system was completed in late 1944,
and construction of operational units had commenced; none, how-
e v e r, were completed before the war ended.
The United States and the Soviet Union each took possession of
both the technology and the engineers from the V-2 missile at the
end of World War II. This knowledge laid the foundations for both
n a t i o n s ’ subsequent development of strategic ballistic missiles for
the delivery of atomic and nuclear warheads. Similarly, they used the
knowledge acquired from the German V-1 program as the basis for
developing their own land-attack cruise missiles that, initially, were
more attractive than ballistic missiles because it was easier to endow
them with longer reach. Both navies quickly appreciated the advan-
tage of deploying land-attack missiles aboard submarines, since it of-
fered the potential for launching weapons against their opponent’s
homeland from a stealthy platform.
The U.S. Navy initially concentrated its efforts in exploiting cruise
missile technology for land-attack missions. It conducted test ﬁrings
of Loon missiles (the U.S. production version of the V-1) from
the submarines C u s k and C a r b o n e r o in early 1947, using radio-
command guidance to improve their accuracy. Both boats served as
guidance ships for later trials of the Regulus near- s u p e r s o n i c
n u c l e a r-armed cruise missile, fired from surface ships. Two other
ﬂeet submarines, the Tu n n y and the B a r b e r o , received full conver-
sions for front-line operation of Regulus missiles, entering service in
1953 and 1955, respectively. They soon were joined by the two pur-
pose-built boats of the Grayback class and, in 1959, by the nuclear-
powered H a l i b u t . A large force of more elaborate nuclear- p o w e r e d
cruise missile submarines was proposed to supplement the Halibut.
All boats were to carry the supersonic Regulus II, but, after limited
testing, that missile was canceled in December 1958 as redundant to
requirements (and to concentrate funding and effort on the Polaris
ballistic missile); thus the submarines were reordered as nuclear-
powered torpedo-attack craft.
The Soviet Navy exploited the concepts of the German V-2 missile
launch canisters to develop a design for a very large submarine capa-
ble of ﬁring both ballistic and cruise missiles against land targets. In
the 1949 preliminary design the 5,400-ton (surfaced) Project P-2
boat could carry twelve R-1 ballistic missiles (the Soviet production
version of the V-2) and additional cruise missiles, but its engineers
were unable to solve a host of development problems, leading to the
p r o j e c t ’s termination. The same design bureau began work theS T R ATEGIC MISSILE SUBMARINES 55

following year on Project 624, a 2,650-ton (submerged) cruise mis-
sile submarine powered by a closed-cycle Walter steam turbine
based on the plant designed for the German Type XXVI boat. When
that, too, was halted, work began on Project 628, a cruise
missile–armed development of the wartime Series XIV design, but
the Soviet Navy’s rejection of its missile terminated efforts in 1953.
Thereafter, the Soviet Navy simultaneously pursued the develop-
ment and deployment of both cruise and ballistic missile sub-
marines. The diesel-electric Project 611A class (NAT O - d e s i g n a t e d
Zulu-IV) submarine B - 6 2 , with a single launch tube, was the ﬁrst
to ﬁre an R-11 ballistic missile (NATO-designated Scud) on 16 Sep-
tember 1955. The succeeding Project 611AB class (NAT O -
designated Zulu-V) were the first operational ballistic missile sub-
marines, the ﬁrst boat (the B-67) commissioning on 30 June 1956.
These six boats could launch their two R-11FM missiles from verti-
cal tubes in the sail and retained the torpedo capabilities of their
conventionally armed sisters. They were followed by 22 Project 629
class (NATO-designated Golf) boats armed with three improved
R-13 missiles and 9 similarly armed nuclear-powered boats of the
Project 658 class (NATO-designated Hotel).
Meanwhile, after trials with two boats between 1955 and 1959—
a Project 611 (NATO-designated Zulu) and a Project 613 (NAT O -
designated Whiskey)—two series of operational conversions based
on the Whiskey design entered service from 1960, as the six Project
644 class (NATO-designated Whiskey Twin Cylinder) and the six
Project 665 class (NATO-designated Whiskey Long Bin). Soviet de-
signers also pursued development of nuclear-powered cruise missile
submarines, initially exploring a modiﬁed version of the ﬂe e t ’s ﬁr s t
n u c l e a r-powered attack boat as Project 627A and then a much
larger 7,140-ton (submerged) type as Project 653, both optimized
for submerged operation. But problems with the P-20 missiles for
those vessels halted development. Instead, a new nuclear- p o w e r e d
design, Project 659 (NATO-designated Echo I), which featured a
conventional hull form to maximize stability while launching mis-
siles on the surface, entered service from 1961. On 14 December
1959, however, the new Strategic Rocket Forces were established.
That arm of service took control of all land-based strategic missiles,
downgrading the importance of the navy’s cruise missile boats and
leading to the decision to concentrate efforts on sea-based ballistic
missiles and focus cruise missile efforts on antiship warfare.
Soviet ballistic missile submarines were initially very vulnerable
during launch, because they had to surface to ﬁre their missiles. On56 S U B M A R I N E S

10 September 1960, the B-62 of the Project 611AB class success-
fully ﬁred a ballistic missile while submerged. The new D-4 launch
system it tested replaced the earlier D-2 system originally ﬁtted in
the Project 629 and Project 658 classes of ballistic missile sub-
marines that began entering service in 1960. The upgraded Project
629A and Project 658M boats carried three liquid-fueled R-21
( N ATO-designated Sark) missiles with a range of 870 miles (twice
that of the earlier R-13 weapons) in vertical tubes and recommis-
sioned beginning in February 1962.
In 1955, the United States began work on a submarine-launched
ballistic missile that would ultimately become the Polaris. Design-
ers also began working on options for launching ballistic missiles
from submarines. Initially their designs were conceived to accom-
modate modified versions of the U.S. A r m y ’s liquid-fueled Jupiter
missile and emerged as similar to the S k i p j a c k class attack boats,
with much enlarged sails incorporating the necessary launch tubes.
The urgent development of the solid-fueled Polaris, however, made
a more efficient arrangement possible. The first U.S. ballistic mis-
sile submarines used a modification of the S k i p j a c k class attack
boat design, lengthening the hull by 130 feet to accommodate 16
launch tubes in two rows of eight, additional auxiliary machinery,
and special navigation and missile-control equipment. The navy
was able to accelerate production by reordering a nuclear attack
boat, the S c o r p i o n , as a ballistic missile submarine and incorporat-
ing its machinery and structural material into its construction. The
first U.S. Navy ballistic missile submarine, the George Wa s h i n g t o n ,
commissioned on 30 December 1959. The George Wa s h i n g t o n t e s t -
fired two Polaris missiles while submerged on 20 July 1960 in the
Atlantic and departed on its first operational patrol on 15 Novem-
ber 1960.
The Polaris missile was upgraded over time, its range increasing
with each iteration. The fourth upgrade produced a new missile,
the Poseidon, which featured Multiple Independently Targeted
Re-entry Vehicles (MIRVs). Each missile could carry 10–14 inde-
pendently targeted nuclear warheads. It was relatively straightfor-
ward to upgrade existing ballistic missile submarines to launch
successive versions of Po l a r i s / Poseidon missiles, since it was not
necessary to enlarge their launch tubes to accommodate them. The
first boat to take Poseidon missiles to sea, the James Madison, d e-
parted on patrol on 30 March 1971, while the final war patrol by
any of the 41 submarines armed with these missiles was not com-
pleted until 1994.S T R ATEGIC MISSILE SUBMARINES 57

The Soviet Union was slower than the United States in developing
ballistic missile submarines capable of carrying heavy loads of these
weapons. In part this was attributable to an attraction toward de-
ploying cruise missile boats, since cruise missiles seemed to offer
greater and less complex development potential than ballistic
weapons and the submarines would be capable of undertaking a
broader range of missions. The emergence of a politically powerful
rival for funding in the form of the Strategic Rocket Forces also in-
hibited development of boats matching the weapons capabilities of
U.S. strategic submarines. The disappointing results of efforts to
field long-range, heavily armed cruise missiles and the success in
overcoming difﬁculties in developing solid-fueled ballistic weapons
led the Soviet Fleet to develop and deploy a large force of powerfully
armed strategic missile submarines: 34 of the Project 667A class
(NATO-designated Yankee) followed by 43 of the various versions of
the Project 667B type (NATO-designated Delta), which entered ser-
vice between late 1967 and early 1986.
Both the United States and the Soviet Union continued to de-
velop longer-range, more powerful ballistic missiles, which therefore
were larger, and the bigger submarines required to accommodate
them. For the United States the new missile was the Trident—sub-
stantially larger than the Poseidon—which led to the design of the
O h i o-class submarines, the largest in the world at that time. They
embarked 24 of the new weapons, an arrangement regarded as a
considerably more efﬁcient use of submarine platforms. The ﬁrst of
18 boats, the Ohio, commissioned on 11 November 1981. All remain
in service, although four are being converted to launch up to 154
cruise missiles via 22 vertical tubes, rather than ballistic missiles,
with more possibly converting in the future. The Soviet Union coun-
tered with its Project 941 class ballistic missile submarines (NATO-
designated Typhoon), the first, the T K - 2 0 8 , commissioning on
12 December 1981. They use an unusual double pressure hull form,
are even larger than the Ohio class, and thus are the world’s largest
submarines, although they carried only 20 R-39 ballistic missiles
(NATO-designated Sturgeon) in vertical tubes. The six boats of the
class remain in service.
Britain, France, and China also operate strategic missile sub-
marines. The British turned to the United States for their missiles,
purchasing Polaris A-3 missiles, launch tubes, and control systems
but developing their own warheads. The design process for the four
boats of the Resolution class took a path similar to that of the ﬁrst
U.S. ballistic missile submarines. The British essentially used the58 S U B M A R I N E S

design for their own Valiant class attack submarines and inserted the
missile launching section from contemporary U.S. vessels abaft
the sail to create the ﬁnal design for their own boats. The ﬁrst of the
class, the Resolution, departed on its ﬁrst operational patrol on 15
June 1968. When the United States developed the more powerful
Trident missile, Britain negotiated an amendment to the original Po-
laris agreement in 1982 to acquire the new weapon and the neces-
sary systems for its operation. The four boats of the Vanguard class
used a greatly enlarged version of the Resolution class design. Unlike
their U.S. equivalents, the British boats carry only 16 missiles. They
began operational patrols in December 1994.
Largely at the instigation of President Charles de Gaulle, the
French also created a submarine nuclear deterrent force. The
French took a wholly independent route, developing their own in-
digenous M1 strategic ballistic missile system. The six submarines of
the R é d o u t a b l e class also were the first French nuclear- p o w e r e d
boats, and they began operational patrols in 1971. After 1985 these
boats were upgraded to launch the M4 missile with MIRV capability.
As in the United States, the Soviet Union, and Britain, advances in
missile design necessitated the development of larger submarines to
accommodate the more powerful weapons. The four French boats of
the Tr i o m p h a n t class carry 16 M45 ballistic missiles capable of
launching up to 6 MIRV warheads to a distance of 3,750 miles.
These large boats are unusual in using a nuclear-powered turbo-
electric propulsion system. They are scheduled to receive upgrades
to launch new M51 weapons, with a range of 5,000 miles, beginning
in 2010.
After China joined the “nuclear club,” it too inclined toward devel-
oping submarines to launch strategic missiles. In the absence of in-
digenous capability to realize that ambition, it turned to its then ally
for assistance. The Soviet Union fabricated hull sections for two Pro-
ject 629 class (NATO-designated Golf) ballistic missile submarines at
Komsomolsk and transferred them, together with machinery and
launch systems, to China in the early 1960s. The Chinese assembled
one boat at Darien in the mid-1960s and commissioned it as its Ty p e
035. The other boat, however, was never assembled. The completed
submarine was deployed for testing: ﬁrst of Soviet R-11F weapons
and later of indigenously derived missiles. In 1981, China launched a
single example of its Type 092 ballistic missile submarine (NAT O -
designated Xia). This was an enlarged version of China’s ﬁrst nuclear-
powered attack submarine design, the Type 091 class (NAT O -
designated Han), lengthened to accommodate launch tubes forS T R ATEGIC MISSILE SUBMARINES 59

twelve JL-1 solid-propellant ballistic missiles with a range of 1,100
miles carrying a 200- to 300-kiloton warhead. That single boat be-
came operational in 1983, although it was not until 1988 that the
Chinese satisfactorily resolved launch control problems. Between
1995 and 1998 it was upgraded to deploy improved JL-2 weapons
equipped with up to four MIRV warheads and with a maximum range
of 5,000 miles. China is reported to be developing a new class of four
n u c l e a r-powered ballistic missile submarines (Type 094), but little re-
liable information on their characteristics is available.

S T R ATEGIC MISSILE
SUBMARINE OPERAT I O N S

The U.S. Navy began operating its Regulus-armed submarines on
strategic deterrent patrols in September 1958. Exactly one year
l a t e r, these boats initiated the continuous deployment of one or
more cruise missile submarines in the North Pa c i ﬁc, targeting sites
in the Soviet Far East for attack in the event of war. These patrols
continued until July 1964, when the boats terminated their deter-
rent mission. Conventional Soviet cruise missile boats, on the other
hand, undertook only relatively short-range missions in the Baltic
Sea and Arctic Ocean until they were withdrawn from front-line
service in the late 1960s, although they no longer operated land at-
tack missiles after 1965. Their nuclear-powered cohorts of the Pro-
ject 659 class (NATO-designated Echo I), however, were very active
in the North Atlantic and the Pa c i ﬁc. One boat, the K - 1 2 2 , was se-
riously damaged internally by a battery ﬁre on 21 August 1980 while
operating off Okinawa; the fire killed nine crewmen and left the
ship without power. Soviet ships had to tow the submarine to its
base at Vladivostok.
U.S. ballistic missile submarines began deterrent patrols in the
Atlantic in November 1960 and in the Paciﬁc in December 1964. To
maximize sea time, the U.S. Navy introduced a new system for oper-
ating its strategic missile submarines. Each boat was assigned two
complete crews (differentiated as the Blue and Gold crews, the navy
colors). While one crew took the boat on a 60-day deterrent patrol,
the other was training, resting, or on leave. Upon the boat’s return to
port, the active crew oversaw replenishment and repairs, then ex-
changed with the alternate crew, which took the boat on patrol
again. This crewing system has been maintained continuously to60 S U B M A R I N E S

date; it allows the navy to maintain up to two-thirds of its active bal-
listic missile submarine ﬂeet at sea at any moment.
The early Soviet conventional Project 611AB class (NAT O -
designated Zulu-V) operated exclusively in European waters as the-
ater threat weapons. The later conventional Project 629 class
( N ATO-designated Golf) and nuclear-powered boats of the Project
658 class (NATO-designated Hotel) operated extensively with the
Northern, Baltic, and Pa c i ﬁc ﬂeets from 1962 until 1989. During
those operations the K-129 of the Project 629 class was lost on pa-
trol in the North Pacific after an internal explosion on 8 March
1968. The Central Intelligence Agency undertook a clandestine
salvage operation in 1974 using the purpose-built salvage vessel
Glomar Explorer to recover the Soviet submarine. During the lifting
of the wreck the hull broke apart, and only the forward section was
recovered for examination and subsequent disposal. The Project 658
class was plagued with problems, largely a consequence of poor
workmanship and inadequate quality control. A coolant pipe burst
aboard the lead member of the class, the K-19, while it was operat-
ing submerged near Greenland on 4 July 1961, exposing the entire
crew of 139 ofﬁcers and men, of whom 14 died, to excessive radia-
tion. After repairs the K-19 returned to operations but collided with
the U.S. nuclear-powered attack submarine Gato on 15 November
1969, damaging both boats. Then, on 24 February 1972, while on
patrol 800 miles northeast of Newfoundland, the K - 1 9 suffered a
catastrophic failure in its cooling system, resulting in the deaths of
28 of its crew. The powerless submarine was towed back to its base
on the Kola Peninsular, repaired, returned to service on 5 November
1972, and not decommissioned until 1990. Other members of the
class also suffered major power plant problems, often requiring tows
back to port, and leading to a major reappraisal of inspection proce-
dures during construction and repair.
The Soviet Union began deploying the large strategic missile sub-
marines of the Project 667A class (NATO-designated Yankee) on de-
terrent patrols off the Atlantic coast of the United States from June
1969 and off the Paciﬁc coast from October 1970. Thereafter, the
Soviet Navy maintained two to four of the class off the Atlantic coast
and at least one off the Pacific coast. After these submarines had
been supplemented by the larger boats of the Project 667B type
(NATO-designated Delta), the Soviets kept 10 to 14 vessels at sea on
deterrent patrols, with about three-quarters of all its ballistic missile
submarines ready for almost immediate service. It also developed
systems enabling submarines to launch missiles while alongside inS T R ATEGIC MISSILE SUBMARINES 61

their homeports to maximize their ability to intervene in a conﬂict at
short notice. This disposition of forces exploited the range advantage
of the Soviet liquid-fueled missiles, which enabled their submarines
to operate within “bastions,” oceanic areas protected by the Soviet
Fleet’s own antisubmarine and antiship forces from attack by NATO
antisubmarine and strike operations. That capability became even
more effective when the huge Project 941 class ballistic missile sub-
marines (NATO-designated Typhoon) became operational in late
1981; the range of their weapons was sufﬁcient for them to operate
in the Arctic Ocean, where they were virtually immune from attack.
Both the British and French ballistic missile submarine forces
adopted a crewing system similar to that devised by the U.S. Navy,
using two crews to maximize operational deployments. The two
forces have consistently maintained about three-quarters of their
submarines in operational status, with the other quarter undergoing
major reﬁts. However, the smaller number of submarines each navy
possessed meant that few boats were at sea. During the Cold War up
to half of the total forces were deployed on deterrent patrols at any
one time, but both navies now operate at a reduced tempo. Each
ﬂeet is currently reduced to four submarines, usually with only one
on patrol at any given time. China, with a single boat, does not main-
tain standing patrols. Its single Type 092 submarine has rarely ven-
tured outside Chinese territorial waters.S U B M A R I N E S O F T H E W O R L DPioneers

Netherlands Drebbel’s submarine (1620)
United States Turtle (1776)
Nautilus (1800)
Germany Brandtaucher (1850)
United States Phillips’s submarines (1852)
Germany Diable Marin (1855)
Spain Ictineo (1859)
United States Pioneer (1862)
Pioneer II (1862)
Alligator (1862)
H.L. Hunley (1863)
France Plongeur (1863)
United States Sub Marine Explorer (1866)
Russia Aleksandrovski’s submarine (1866)
United States Intelligent Whale (1868)
Russia Drzewiecki Type I (1877)
Drzewiecki Type II (1878)
Drzewiecki Type III (1878)
United States Holland I (1878)
United Kingdom Resurgam I (1878)
Resurgam II (1879)
United States Fenian Ram (1881)
Holland III (1883)
Peacemaker (1884)
Holland IV (1885)
United States Baker’s submarine (1892)
United States Plunger (1895)
Argonaut I (1897)
Argonaut II (1899)

65Submarine Builders

Submarine construction, as many navies have learned to their cost, is
and always has been a complex and technically challenging task. Conse-
q u e n t l y, many of the yards currently involved in building submarines are
complexes with long histories of constructing this type of boat. In several
instances, these shipyards have built submarines for a hundred years or
more. Over that stretch of time, however, they have altered greatly, adding
new equipment and capabilities, and, very often, passing through multiple
changes of ownership and business designation. In an attempt to convey
this continuity, the reference section shows only one name for each yard.
The full list of business names over time follows.

61 Kommuna: 61 Kommuna Yard No. 445, Nikolayev.
A d m i r a l t y: Admiralty Shipyard, St. Petersburg. It became the Marti Ya r d
No. 194, Leningrad, in 1922; the Leningrad Admiralty Association in
1972; and the United Admiralty Association, St. Petersburg, in 1999.
A.G.-Weser: see Bremen.
Ansaldo: S. A. Ansaldo, Sestri Ponente-Genoa.
A r m s t r o n g: Sir W. G. Armstrong, Whitworth and Company, Newcastle-
upon-Tyne. It became Vickers-Armstrong, Ltd. in 1927.
ASC: Australian Submarine Corporation, Adelaide.
Atlas: Atlas Werke, Bremen.
BAE Systems Marine: see Barrow.
Baltic: Baltic Works, St. Petersburg. It became the Ordzhonikidze Yard No.
189, Leningrad, in 1922, and the Baltic Shipyard in 1999.
Baltic Yard: Baltic Yard, Nikolayev. This yard was a subsidiary of the Baltic
Works in St. Petersburg.
Barrow: Barrow Ship Building Company, Barrow-in-Furness. It became the
Naval Construction and Armaments Company in 1888; Vickers, Sons
and Maxim, Ltd. in 1897; Vickers, Ltd. in 1911; Vickers-Armstrong, Ltd.
in 1927; Vickers-Armstrong Shipbuilders in 1955; Vickers, Ltd. Ship-
building Group in 1968; British Shipbuilders in 1977; Vickers Ship-
building and Engineering, Ltd. in 1986; Marconi Marine in 1995; and
BAE Systems Marine in 1999.

6768 S U B M A R I N E S

Beardmore: William Beardmore and Company, Glasgow.
Bergsunds: Bergsunds Verkstad, Stockholm.
Bethlehem Shipbuilding Corporation: see Quincy.
Blohm und Vo s s: Schiffswerft und Maschinenfabrik Blohm und Vo s s ,
Hamburg. It became Blohm und Voss A.G. in 1955 and was acquired by
Thyssen Industrie A.G. in 1996.
Bong Dao Bo: Bong Dao Bo Shipyard, Singpo.
Boston: Boston Navy Yard, Charlestown, Massachusetts.
Bremen: A.G.-Weser, Bremen. It became the principal component of the
Deutsche Schiff- und Maschinenbau Aktiengesellschaft (Deschimag)
in 1926.
Brest: Arsenal de Brest.
British Pa c i fi c: British Pacific Construction and Engineering Company,
Vancouver, British Columbia.
British Shipbuilders: see Barrow and Cammell Laird.
California: California Shipbuilding Company, Long Beach, California.
Cammell Laird: Cammell Laird, Birkenhead. It became British Ship-
builders in 1977, and Vickers Shipbuilding and Engineering, Ltd. in
1986.
Canadian Vickers: Canadian Vickers, Ltd. Montreal.
Cantieri Navali del Quarnaro (CNQ): see Fiume.
Cantiere Navale Triestino (CNT): see Monfalcone.
Cantieri Riuniti dell’Adriatico (CRDA): see Monfalcone.
Carraca: Arsenal de la Carraca, Cadiz.
C a rt a g e na: Sociedad Española de Construcion Naval, Cartagena Dock-
yard. It became the Empresa Nacional Bazan de Construciones Navales
Militaries S. A. in 1947; Izar Construciones Navales S. A. in 2001; and
Navantia S. A. in 2005.
CDT: Cantieri del Tirreno, Riva Trigoso.
Chatham: Chatham Dockyard.
Chernomorskiy Yard No. 444: see Nikolayev.
Cherbourg: Arsenal de Cherbourg. Redesignated Direction des Construc-
tions Navales (DCN) in 1998.
CNF: Chantiers Navals Français, Caen.
Copenhagen: Orlogsværftet (Copenhagen Navy Yard).
C r a m p: William Cramp and Sons Ship and Engine Building Company,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Crescent: Crescent Shipyard, Elizabethport, New Jersey.
Crichton: Crichton Yard, St. Petersburg.
Crichton-Vulcan: Crichton-Vulcan, Aabo.
Daewoo: Daewoo Shipyard, Okpo.
Dalzavod: Dalzavod Yard No. 202, Vladivostok.
Danubius Shipyard: see Fiume.
Danzig: Kaiserliche Werft (Imperial Dock Yard) Danzig.
Danziger: Danziger Werft, Danzig.SUBMARINE BUILDERS 69

Denny: William Denny and Brothers, Dumbarton.
De Sch e l d e: Koninklijke Maatschappij De Schelde (De Schelde Royal
Dock Yard), Vlissingen.
D e u t s che Schiff- und Maschinenbau A k t i e n g e s e l l s chaft (Desch i m a g ):
see Bremen and Seebeckwerft.
D e u t s ch ew e r f t: Deutsche Werft A.G., Hamburg. It merged with
Howaldtsw  erke in 1968 to become Howaldtswerke-Deutsche-We r f t
A.G. with yards in Kiel and Hamburg.
Deutsche Werke: see Kiel.
Devonport: Devonport Dockyard.
Direction des Constructions Navales (DCN): see Cherbourg.
Dubigeon: Anciens Chantiers Dubigeon, Nantes.
Echevarrieta y Larrinaga: Astillero Echevarrieta y Larrinaga, Cadiz.
Ekensberg: Ekensberg A.B., Stockholm.
Electric Boat: Electric Boat Company, Groton, Connecticut. It became the
Electric Boat Division of General Dynamics Corporation in 1952.
Empresa Nacional Bazan de Construciones Navales Militaries S. A. :
see Cartagena.
Fairﬁeld: Fairﬁeld Shipbuilding and Engineering Company, Govan.
FIAT: Societa FIAT-San Giorgio de Spezza, La Spezia.
Fi j e n o o r d: Maatschappij voor Scheeps-en Werktuigbouw Fijenoord,
Schiedam. It became N.V. Dok- en Werfmaatschappij Wilton-Fijenoord
in 1929.
Fincantieri: see Monfalcone and Muggiano.
Fi u m e: Danubius Shipyard and Machine Works Company, Fiume. It be-
came the Ganz Machine, Wagon, and Shipyard Company in 1911 and
the Cantieri Navali del Quarnaro (CNQ) in 1920 after Fiume became
part of Italy.
Flenderwerke: Flenderwerke, Lübeck.
Flensburger: Flensburger Schiffaht-Gesselschaft, Flensburg.
Fore River Ship and Engine Company: see Quincy.
Galati: Santieri Galati, Galata.
Ganz Machine, Wagon, and Shipyard Company: see Fiume.
General Dynamics Corporation: see Electric Boat and Quincy.
G e r m a n i a: Norddeutsche Schiffbau A.G., Kiel. It became the Fr i e d r i c h
Krupp Germania-Werft A.G. in 1883 and merged with Howaldtswerke,
Kiel, in 1945.
Gironde: Forges and Chantiers de la Gironde, Bordeaux.
Golcük: Golcük Naval Shipyard, Izmir.
G o rk i y: Sormovski Yard, Nizhniy Novgorod. In 1922 it became the Kras-
noye Sormovo Yard No.112, Nizhniy Novgorod (renamed Gorkiy in
1932).
Guangdong: Kiang Chou Ship Yard, Guangdong.
H a m bu r g: Stettiner Maschinenbau A.G. Vulcan, Hamburg. It became
Howaldtswerke Hamburg A.G. in 1930, and it merged with Deutsche70 S U B M A R I N E S

Werft in 1968 to become Howaldtswerke-Deutsche-Werft A.G., with
yards in Kiel and Hamburg. The Hamburg yard was sold to Blohm und
Voss in 1986.
Hellenic: Hellenic Shipyard, Skaramanga.
Horten: Horten Navy Yard.
Howaldtswerke-Deutsche-Werft A.G.: see Deutschewerft, Hamburg, and
HWK.
Howaldtswerke Hamburg A.G.: see Hamburg.
Howaldtswerke, Kiel: see HWK.
HSK: Hietalahden Sulkutelakka ja Konepaja, Helsinki.
Huludao: Bohai Shipbuilding Heavy Industrial Company, Huludao.
HWK: Howaldtswerke, Kiel. It was sold to the Kriegsmarine in 1939; re-
verted to Howaldtswerke in 1943; and merged with Deutsche Werft in
1968 to become Howaldtswerke-Deutsche-Werft A.G., with yards in Kiel
and Hamburg.
Hyundai: Hyundai Heavy Industries, Ulsan.
I n g a l l s: Ingalls Shipbuilding Corporation, Pascagoula, Mississippi. It be-
came Litton Industries Ingalls Shipbuilding Corporation in 1961, and
Northrop Grumman Ship Systems Ingalls Operations in 2001.
Istanbul: Pendik Naval Shipyard, Istanbul.
Italcantieri: see Monfalcone and Muggiano.
Izar Construciones Navales S. A.: see Cartagena.
Jiangnan: Jiangnan Shipyard, Shanghai.
John Brown: John Brown and Company, Clydebank.
Karachi: Karachi Shipyard.
Karlskrona: Karlskrona Örlogsvarvet (Navy Yard).
Kawasaki: Kawasaki Shipbuilding, Kobe.
Kawasaki Shipbuilding, Tanagawa: see Tanagawa.
K i e l: Kaiserliche Werft (Imperial Dock Yard), Kiel. It became the Reich-
swerf in 1919; privatized as Deutsche Werke in 1925; merged with
Howaldtswerke Kiel in 1937; was sold to the Kriegsmarine in 1939 and
became the Kriegsmarine Werft Kiel in 1943; and it reverted to
Howaldtswerke in 1945.
Kockums: Kockums Mekaniska Verkstad, Malmö.
Komsomolsk: Leninsky Komsomol Yard No.199, Komsomolsk-on-Amur.
Kriegsmarine Werft Kiel: see Kiel.
Krupp Germania-Werft A.G.: see Germania.
Kure: Kure Navy Yard.
La Ciotat: Chantiers Navale La Ciotat, Le Trait.
Lake: Lake Torpedo Boat Company, Bridgeport, Connecticut.
La Seyne: Forges et Chantiers de la Méditeranée, La Seyne.
La Spezia: Arsenale Militare Marittimo della Spezia.
Leningrad Admiralty Association: see Admiralty and Sudomekh.
Litton Industries Ingalls Shipbuilding Corporation: see Ingalls.
Loire: Ateliers et Chantiers de la Loire, Nantes.SUBMARINE BUILDERS 71

Lorient: Arsenal de Lorient.
Manitowoc: Manitowoc Shipbuilding Company, Manitowoc, Wisconsin.
Marconi Marine: see Barrow.
Mare Island: Mare Island Navy Yard, Vallejo, California.
Marti Yard No. 194: see Admiralty.
Marti Yard No. 444: see Nikolayev.
Mayang Do: Mayang Do Ship Yard.
Mazagon: Mazagon Dock, Ltd. Mumbai.
Metal Works: Metal Works, St. Petersburg.
Mitsubishi: Mitsubishi Shipbuilding and Engineering Company, Kobe.
Mitsui: Mitsui Shipbuilding and Engineering Company, Tamano.
Molotovsk Yard No. 402: see Severodvinsk.
Monfalcone: Cantiere Navale Triestino (CNT), Monfalcone. It became the
Cantieri Riuniti dell’Adriatico (CRDA) in 1920, after Trieste became
part of Italy; it was nationalized as part of Italcantieri in 1969, and reor-
ganized as Fincantieri in 1984.
Moran Brothers Company: see Seattle.
Motala: Motala Verkstad.
Muggiano: S. A. Cantieri Navali del Muggiano, Muggiano-La Spezia. It be-
came part of the Odero-Terni-Orlando (OTO) conglomerate in 1923, na-
tionalized as part of Italcantieri in 1969, and reorganized as Fincantieri
in 1984.
Nagasaki: Kawasaki Shipbuilding, Nagasaki.
Naval Construction and Armaments Company: see Barrow.
Naval Yard: see Nikolayev.
Navantia S. A.: see Cartagena.
Nederlandsche: Nederlandsche Dok en Scheepsbouw, Amsterdam.
Neptun: Neptun Schiffswerft und Maschinenfabrik A.G., Rostock.
Nevskiy: Nevskiy Shipbuilding and Machine Works, St. Petersburg.
Nevskiy Nikolayev: Nevskyi Yard, Nikolayev. This yard was a subsidiary of
the Nevskiy Shipbuilding and Machine Works, St. Petersburg.
Newport News: Newport News Shipbuilding and Drydock Company, New-
port News, VA. It became Northrop Grumman Newport News in 2001.
New York: New York Ship Building Corporation, Camden, New Jersey.
N i k o l a y ev: Nikolayev Shipbuilding, Mechanical, and Iron Works, Niko-
layev. It became the Naval Yard in 1917; the Marti Yard No. 444 in 1922;
the Nosenko Yard No. 444 in 1956; and the Chernomorskiy Yard No.
444 in 1964.
Nobel and Lessner: Nobel and Lessner Yard, Reval.
N o r d s e ew e rke: Rheinstahl-Nordseewerke A.G., Emden. It became
ThyssenKrupp Marine Systems Nordseewerke in 1991.
Normand: Ateliers et Chantiers Augustin-Normand, Le Havre.
Northern Shipyard: see Zhdanov.
Northrop Grumman Newport News: see Newport News.
Northrop Grumman Ship Systems Ingalls Operations: see Ingalls.72 S U B M A R I N E S

Nosenko Yard No. 444: see Nikolayev.
Odero: Cantiere Odero, Sestri Ponente-Genoa.
Odero-Terni-Orlando (OTO): see Muggiano.
Ordzhonikidze Yard No. 189: see Baltic.
Orlando: Cantiere Navale Luigi Orlando, Livorno.
Palmer: Palmer’s Shipbuilding and Iron Company, Jarrow.
Pembroke: Pembroke Dockyard.
Pola: Kaiserliche Werft (Imperial Dock Yard), Pola.
Portsmouth: Portsmouth Naval Shipyard, Seavey Island, Maine.
Portsmouth DY: Portsmouth Dockyard.
Puget Sound: Puget Sound Naval Shipyard, Bremerton, Washington.
Pula: Uljanik Yard, Pula.
Putilov Works: see Zhdanov.
Quincy: Fore River Ship and Engine Company, Quincy, Massachusetts. It
became Bethlehem Shipbuilding Corporation in 1913, and the Quincy
Shipbuilding Division of General Dynamics Corporation in 1964.
Reichswerf: see Kiel.
Reihersteigwerft: Reihersteigwerft, Hamburg.
Rio de Janeiro: Arsenal de Marinha, Rio de Janeiro.
Rochefort: Arsenal de Rochefort.
Rotterdamse: Rotterdamse Droogdok Maatschappij, Rotterdam.
Sasebo: Sasebo Navy Yard.
Schichau: F. Schichau GmbH., Danzig.
Schneider: Ateliers et Chantiers Schneider-Creusot, Chalon-sur-Saône.
S c o t t: Scott’s Shipbuilding and Engineering, Greenock. It became Scott-
Lithgow, Ltd. in 1970.
Scott-Lithgow, Ltd.: see Scott.
S e a t t l e: Moran Brothers Company, Seattle, Washington. It became the
Seattle Construction and Drydock Company in 1911, and the Todd Dry
Dock and Construction Company in 1916.
Seebeckwerft: Seebeckwerft, Bremerhaven. It became a component of the
Deutsche Schiff- und Maschinenbau Aktiengesellschaft (Deschimag-
Seebeckwerft) in 1926.
Seine-Maritime: Ateliers et Chantiers de la Seine-Maritime, Le Trait.
S evernoye Mashinostroitelnoye Predpriyatie (Sevmash) Yard: s e e
Severodvinsk.
Severodvinsk: Molotovsk Yard No. 402, Severodvinsk. It became the Sever-
noye Mashinostroitelnoye Predpriyatie (Sevmash) Yard No. 402 in 1957.
Sevmash: see Severodvinsk.
Shanghai: Kiangman Yard, Shanghai.
Sormovo Yard No.112: see Gorkiy.
Split: Split Shipyard.
St. Nazaire: Ateliers et Chantiers de St. Nazaire-Penhoët.SUBMARINE BUILDERS 73

Stockholm: Stockholm Örlogsvarvet (Navy Yard).
Stülcken: Stülcken und Sohn, Hamburg.
Sudomekh: Sudomekh Yard No. 196, Leningrad. It merged with the Marti
Yard No. 194 in 1972 to become the Leningrad Admiralty Association,
which became the United Admiralty Association, St. Petersburg,
in 1999.
Sverdlovsk: Ural Machine Works, Sverdlovsk.
Swan Hunter: Swan Hunter and Wigham Richardson, Newcastle-on Tyne.
Tanagawa: Kawasaki Shipbuilding, Tanagawa.
Thornycroft: John I. Thornycroft and Company, Woolston.
Thyssen Industrie A.G.: see Blohm und Voss.
ThyssenKrupp Marine Systems Nordseewerke: see Nordseewerke.
Todd Dry Dock and Construction Company: see Seattle.
Tosi: Cantieri Tosi S. A., Taranto.
Toulon: Arsenal de Toulon.
UBAG: Ungarische Unterseebootsbau A.G., Fiume.
Union Iron Works: Union Iron Works, San Francisco, California.
United Admiralty Association: see Admiralty and Sudomekh.
Vegesack: Bremer Vulkan A.G., Vegesack.
Venezia: Regia Arsenale di Venezia.
Vickers-Armstrong, Ltd.: see Armstrong and Barrow.
Vickers-Armstrong Shipbuilders: see Barrow.
Vickers, Ltd.: see Barrow.
Vickers, Ltd. Shipbuilding Group: see Barrow.
Vickers Shipbuilding and Engineering, Ltd.: see Barrow and Cammell
Laird.
Vickers, Sons and Maxim, Ltd.: see Barrow.
Vu l c a n: Stettiner Maschinenbau A.G. Vulcan, Stettin. It was reincorpo-
rated as Stettiner Vulcan A.G. in 1930.
White: J. Samuel White and Company, Cowes.
W h i t e h e a d: Whitehead and Company Torpedo and Machine Works, Fiume.
Wilhelmshaven: Kriegsmarine Werft (Naval Dock Yard), Wilhelmshaven.
Wilton-Fijenoord: see Fijenoord.
Wuchang Shipbuilding Industry Company: see Wuhan.
Wuhan: Wuchang Shipyard. It became the Wuchang Shipbuilding Industry
Company in 2004.
Yarrow: Yarrow and Company, Scotstoun.
Yokohama: Yokohama Navy Yard.
Yokosuka: Yokosuka Navy Yard.
Z h d a n o v: Putilov Marine Engine Works, St. Petersburg. It became the
Putilov Works, Petrograd, in 1912; the Northern Shipyard, Leningrad in
1923; the Zhdanov Yard No.190 in 1934; and the Northern Shipyard
in 1989.74 S U B M A R I N E S

DATA TABLES EXPLANATO RY NOT E

Dates: vessel launch dates are in parentheses after name.
Displacement: tables show tonnage for submarines in both surfaced and
submerged mode. Unless otherwise indicated, this figure is for “stan-
dard” tonnage/displacement with a full crew and all munitions and
stores but without fuel.
Dimensions: overall length, beam, and draft while surfaced.
Endurance: nuclear powered submarines essentially have unlimited
range until their reactors require refueling. Their period of continuous
operation instead is limited by their supplies of provisions, water, and
crew necessities.
Machinery: since many submarines have used separate plants for propul-
sion on the surface and while submerged, power outputs are given for
each set of machinery.
Bunkerage and Range: where known, this shows fuel capacity in tons
and range at economical cruising speed in nautical miles (6,080 feet
rather than 5,280 feet).
Armament: torpedo tubes expel torpedoes, usually using compressed air.
Torpedoes exit “swim-out” tubes under their own power. Drop collars are
devices that carry suspended torpedoes and swing outboard to launch
them.
Nationality: the tables list submarines by the national origin of their de-
signs rather than by the nation which operated them. National operators
are indicated by enclosing the name of the country in square brackets
before the list of the vessels’ names; e.g. [Norway].Early Submarines

F R A N C E
G Y M N Ô T E (24 SEPTEMBER 1888)

B u i l d e r : La Seyne
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 30 tons (surfaced), 31 tons
( s u b m e r g e d )
D i m e n s i o n s : 58950 x 59110 x 5960
M a c h i n e r y : 1 Krebs electric motor, 1 shaft.
51 shp = 7.25/4.25 knots
R a n g e : 65 nm at 5 knots surfaced, 25 nm
at 4.25 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 356mm torpedoes (2 Ti s s i e r
drop-collars)
C o m p l e m e n t : 6
N o t e s : The G y m n ô t e , a single-hulled steel
vessel designed by Gustave Zédé, was
the first submarine to demonstrate satis-
factory submerged depth control. Ini-
tially it relied on two horizontal and two
vertical hydroplanes at the extreme stern
for directional control. Additional pairs
of hydroplanes on each side amidships
and aft were added in 1893 and 1895,
r e s p e c t i v e l y. From 1889 it used a Mau-
gin periscope for observation while
submerged. Its principal operational de-
ficiency was a very short range that re-
sulted from total reliance on all-electric
propulsion, which drew on a 564-cell
b a t t e r y. Nevertheless, the experimental
G y m n ô t e proved very successful and laid
the foundation for subsequent Fr e n c h
submarine development.
In 1894 the Gymnôte received an im-
proved 204-cell battery. It was length-
ened by 2 feet in 1898, ﬁtted with a new
108-cell battery, a 90-shp Sautter- H a r l é
electric motor, a large casing and conning
tower, and an improved retractable Dav-
eluy et Violette periscope, increasing sur-
face displacement to 33 tons.
The Gymnôte operated from To u l o n
until it accidentally sank at dockside on 19
June 1907. It was reﬂoated but stricken
from service on 22 May 1908 because of
excessive repair c o s t s .

G U S TAVE ZÉDÉ (1 JUNE 1893)

B u i l d e r : La Seyne
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 266 tons (surfaced), 272
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 159910 x 10960 x 10970
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Sautter-Harlé electric mo-
tors, 1 shaft. 720 shp = 9.25/6.5 knots
R a n g e : 220 nm at 5.5 knots surfaced, 105
nm at 4.5 knots submerged

7576 E A R LY SUBMARINES: FRANCE

A r m a m e n t : 1 x 450mm torpedo tube, total
3 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 19
N o t e s : The single-hull submarine Gustave
Zédé was designed by Gaston Romazotti,
who had supervised the G y m n ô t e’s con-
struction; it was built of Roma metal (a
type of bronze) to limit corrosion. Its
original 720-cell battery exploded while
being charged and was replaced by a 360-
cell unit that cut performance from the
designed 15/8 knots. The evolution of its
directional control surfaces followed the
same pattern as that of the Gymnôte and
proved equally successful. In 1900 the
Gustave Zédé received a new battery and
an enlarged superstructure that sup-
ported a lookout platform.
The Gustave Zédé operated out of
Toulon until stricken on 8 September
1909, when it was sold for scrap.

M O R S E CLASS (1899)

M o r s e (4 July 1899), Fr a n ç a i s (29 January
1901), Algerien (25 April 1901)
B u i l d e r : Cherbourg
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 147 (M o r s e : 143) tons
(surfaced), 160 (M o r s e : 149) tons (sub-
merged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 120950 (Morse: 119980) x 9900
x 9930
M a c h i n e r y : 1 (M o r s e : 2) Sautter- H a r l é
electric motor(s), 1 shaft. 307 (M o r s e :
284) shp = 10/8.25 knots (M o r s e :
7.25/5.5 knots)
R a n g e : 135 nm at 6 knots surfaced,
(Morse: 90 nm at 4.5 knots) surfaced, 97
(Morse: 25) nm at 4.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 1 x 450mm torpedo tube
(bow), 2 x 450mm torpedoes (external
cradles), total 4 torpedoes (M o r s e : 1 x
450mm torpedo tube, total 3 torpedoes)
C o m p l e m e n t : 13
N o t e s : The Morse class was another single-
hull design by Romazotti. The Morse was
constructed of Roma metal, while the
later boats were of steel. The design was
intermediate in size between its two pre-
cursors and brought together their best
features. A national subscription organ-
ized by the newspaper Le Matin g e n e r-
ated the funding for constructing the two
later vessels.
The class operated in the English
Channel. The M o r s e was stricken from
service on 14 September 1908, and the
Fr a n ç a i s and the A l g e r i e n on 26 March
and 1 January 1914, respectively.

N A R VA L (21 OCTOBER 1899)

B u i l d e r : Cherbourg
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 117 tons (surfaced), 202
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 111970 x 12960 x 6910
M a c h i n e r y : 1 Brule triple expansion steam
engine, 1 Adolphe-Seigle tubular boiler, 2
Hillairet-Huguet electric motors, 1 shaft.
225 ihp/86 shp = 9.75/5.25 knots
R a n g e : 345 nm at 8.75 knots surfaced, 58
nm at 2.75 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 450mm torpedoes
(Drzewiecki drop-collars)
C o m p l e m e n t : 13
N o t e s : Maxime Laubeuf ’s design for the
Narval, a surface torpedo boat that could
submerge to make a stealthy attack, wasE A R LY SUBMARINES: FRANCE 77

revolutionary. It was a double-hulled ves-
sel with a strong pressure-resistant inner
hull, containing the crew and machinery,
surrounded by a seaworthy buoyant outer
shell that incorporated the ballast tanks.
The oil-fired steam plant made diving a
leisurely process, because it took 12 min-
utes to cool the boiler and vent excess
steam before submerging. Nevertheless,
the N a r v a l was very successful and s e t
the pattern for submarine development
worldwide up until late in World War II.
The Narval operated mainly in the En-
glish Channel and North Atlantic until
stricken on 3 September 1909, though
the hulk was used for experiments and
not sold until 6 February 1920.

S I R È N E CLASS (1901)

Sirène (4 April 1901), Triton (13 July 1901),
Espadon (7 September 1901), Silure (29
October 1901)
B u i l d e r : Cherbourg
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 157 tons (surfaced), 213
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 99930 x 129100 x 8920
M a c h i n e r y : 1 Brule triple expansion en-
gine, 1 du Temple boiler, 1 Hillairet-
Huguet electric motor, 1 shaft. 275
ihp/100 shp = 9.75/5.75 knots
R a n g e : 600 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 55 nm
at 3.75 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 450mm torpedoes
(Drzewiecki drop-collars)
C o m p l e m e n t : 13
N o t e s : This class used a developed Narval
design. Improved power plant arrange-
ments reduced time required to dive to as
little as 6 minutes.
The class operated out of Cherbourg
in the English Channel and Atlantic until
sold on 12 November 1920.

FA R FA D E T CLASS (1901)

Farfadet (17 May 1901), Korrigan (25 Janu-
ary 1902), Gnôme (24 July 1902), Lutin
(12 February 1903)
B u i l d e r : Rochefort
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 185 tons (surfaced), 202
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 135960 x 9960 x 8990
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Hillairet-Huguet electric
motors, 1 shaft. 183 shp = 6/5.25 knots
R a n g e : 115 nm at 5.25 knots surfaced, 28
nm at 4.25 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 450mm torpedoes (external
cradles)
C o m p l e m e n t : 16
N o t e s : This class used a single-hull design
by Gabriel-Émile-Marie Maugas that
owed much to earlier Romazotti types.
The class operated in the Mediter-
ranean. The Farfadet sank in an accident
at Bizerta on 5 July 1905 with the loss of
fourteen crew, was salved, and returned
to service as the Follet. It was stricken on
22 November 1913. The Lutin also sank
a c c i d e n t a l l y, with the loss of the entire
c r e w, near Sidi-Abdallah on 16 October
1906. It was salved but stricken on 9
June 1907. The Korrigan and the Gnôme
were disarmed on 10 March 1910 and
sold.78 E A R LY SUBMARINES: FRANCE

N A Ï A D E CLASS (1903)

L u d i o n (18 March 1903), S o u f f l e u r ( 2 0
April 1903), Pe r l e (1 November 1903),
Dorade (5 November 1903), Esturgeon (8
January 1904), B o n i t e (6 Fe b r u a r y
1904), Thon (18 March 1904), Grondin
(15 July 1904), A n g u i l l e (8 A u g u s t
1904), A l o s e (12 October 1904), Tr u i t e
(14 April 1905)
B u i l d e r : Toulon
Loutre (25 August 1903), Castor (5 Novem-
ber 1903), P h o q u e (16 March 1904),
Otarie (16 April 1904), Méduse (15 June
1904), Oursin (26 September 1904)
B u i l d e r : Rochefort
Protée (8 October 1903), Lynx (24 Novem-
ber 1903), Naïade (20 February 1904)
B u i l d e r : Cherbourg
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 70.5 tons (surfaced), 73.5
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 779110 x 7950 x 8960
M a c h i n e r y : 1 Panhard and Levasseur
gasoline engine, 1 SEE electric motor, 1
shaft. 57 bhp/95 shp = 7.25/6 knots
R a n g e : 200 nm at 5.5 knots surfaced, 30
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 450mm torpedoes (exter-
nal cradles)
C o m p l e m e n t : 12
N o t e s : R o m a z o t t i ’s single-hull design for
this class introduced internal combus-
tion engines into French submarines.
The short range of these boats was a ma-
jor deﬁciency.
All the class operated in the Mediter-
ranean, apart from the three boats built
at Cherbourg, which served in the En-
glish Channel. The E s t u r g e o n w a s
stricken on 7 June 1912, the Grondin on
8 May 1913, and the remainder on 21
May 1914.

X (15 NOVEMBER 1904)

B u i l d e r : Cherbourg
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 168 tons (surfaced), 179
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 123980 x 10920 x 8910
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Panhard et Levasseur gaso-
line engines, 2 Sautter-Harlé electric mo-
tors, 2 shafts. 260 bhp/230 shp = 8.5/6
knots
R a n g e : 170 nm at 8.25 knots surfaced, 60
nm at 4.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 1 x 450mm torpedo tube (bow),
3 x 450mm torpedoes (2 x Drzewiecki
drop-collars, 1 x external cradle), total 6
t o r p e d o e s
C o m p l e m e n t : 15
N o t e s : Romazotti modified Maugas’s de-
sign for the Farfadet to create an experi-
mental submarine that was the first to
use two shafts.
Renamed the Dauphin on 13 February
1911, this submarine served in the En-
glish Channel until stricken on 21 May
1914.E A R LY SUBMARINES: FRANCE 79

Z (28 MARCH 1904)

B u i l d e r : Rochefort
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 202 tons (surfaced), 222
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 135960 x 99100 x 9920
M a c h i n e r y : 1 Sautter-Harlé diesel engine,
1 Sautter-Harlé electric motor, 1 shaft.
190 bhp/180 shp = 9/7 knots
R a n g e : 500 nm at 5 knots surfaced, 45 nm
at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 450mm torpedo tubes
(bow)
C o m p l e m e n t : 16
N o t e s : Maugas modified his Farfadet d e-
sign by adding a diesel engine for surface
propulsion to create this experimental
submarine.
The Z operated in the Mediterranean
until it was stricken on 9 March 1910.

A I G R E T T E CLASS (1904)

Aigrette (23 January 1904), Cicogne (11 No-
vember 1904)
B u i l d e r : Toulon
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 178 tons (surfaced), 253
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 117970 x 13930 x 8970
M a c h i n e r y : 1 diesel engine, 1 electric mo-
tor, 1 shaft. 150 bhp/139 shp = 9.25/6.25
knots
R a n g e : 1300 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 65
nm at 3.75 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 450mm torpedoes (2 x
Drzewiecki drop-collars, 2 x external
cradles)
C o m p l e m e n t : 14
N o t e s : These boats were essentially diesel-
engined versions of Laubeuf ’s S i r è n e
class submarines. Planned construction
of eleven additional boats was canceled
in September 1902.
Both submarines served in the
Mediterranean until stricken on 12 No-
vember 1919.

Y (24 JULY 1904)

B u i l d e r : Toulon
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 178 tons (surfaced), 253
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 117970 x 13930 x 8970
M a c h i n e r y : 1 diesel engine, 1 shaft. 250
bhp = 10/6 knots
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 450mm torpedo tubes
(bow), 3 x 450mm torpedoes (2 x
Drzewiecki drop-collars, 1 x external cra-
dle aft)
C o m p l e m e n t : 15
N o t e s : Émile Bertin designed this experi-
mental, single-hull submarine that used a
diesel engine for both surfaced and sub-
merged propulsion. A plan to ﬁt an elec-
tric motor and batteries to drive it while
submerged was abandoned.
The Y remained in trials status
throughout its career. It was disarmed
and stricken on 1 March 1909.80 E A R LY SUBMARINES: FRANCE

O M E G A (28 NOVEMBER 1905)

B u i l d e r : Toulon
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 306 tons (surfaced), 409
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 160950 x 13990 x 9930
M a c h i n e r y : 1 du Temple triple expansion
engine, 1 du Temple boiler, 1 Nancy elec-
tric motor, 1 shaft. 350 ihp/234 shp =
10.25/6 knots
R a n g e : 1076 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 45
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 450mm torpedo tubes
(bow), 4 x 450mm torpedoes (2 x
Drzewiecki drop-collars, 2 x external cra-
dles aft), total 6 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 22
N o t e s : An experimental double-hull sub-
marine designed by Émile Bertin and
Emmanuel Petithomme that used half
the machinery arrangements of the later
Pluviôse class boats.
The Omega was renamed the A r g-
onaute on 27 September 1910. It oper-
ated in the Mediterranean until stricken
on 20 May 1919.

É M E R A U D E CLASS (1906)

É m e r a u d e (6 August 1906), O p a l e (20 No-
vember 1906), Rubis (26 June 1907)
B u i l d e r : Cherbourg
S a p h i r (6 February 1908), To p a s e (2 July
1908), Turquoise (3 August 1908)
B u i l d e r : Toulon
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 392 tons (surfaced), 425
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 147940 x 129100 x 12900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Sautter-Harlé diesel en-
gines, 2 Sautter-Harlé electric motors, 2
shafts. 600 bhp/450 shp = 11.5/9.25
knots
R a n g e : 2000 nm at 7.25 knots surfaced,
100 nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 450mm torpedo tubes (4
bow, 2 stern), total 6 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 21
N o t e s : These single-hull boats designed by
Maugas were based on his earlier design
for the Farfadet class, modified for two-
shaft propulsion. They lacked an ade-
quate reserve of buoyancy and also
initially had problems with their diesel
engines. The Topase and the Tu r q u o i s e
were ﬁtted with single 37mm deck guns
in August 1915.
These boats operated primarily in the
Mediterranean. The Saphir was mined
and sunk in the Sea of Marmara on 15
January 1915. The Turquoise was beached
as a result of damage from Turkish guns
in the Sea of Marmara on 30 October
1915 and taken into the Turkish Fleet as
the Mustadieh Ombashi but saw no fur-
ther service. After its return to Fr e n c h
control, it was stricken with its sisters on
12 November 1919.E A R LY SUBMARINES: FRANCE 81

C I R C É CLASS (1907)

Circé (13 September 1907), C a l y p s o ( 2 2
October 1907)
B u i l d e r : Toulon
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 392 tons (surfaced), 425
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 147940 x 129100 x 12900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2
Hillairet-Huguet electric motors, 2
shafts. 630 bhp/460 shp = 12/7.75 knots
R a n g e : 2160 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 98
nm at 3.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 450mm torpedoes (2 x
Drzewiecki drop-collars, 4 x external cra-
dles), 1 x 47mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 22
N o t e s : Laubeuf developed this design as
an enlarged two-shaft version of his ear-
lier boats to produce a high-seas subma-
rine type.
Both boats operated in the Mediter-
ranean before World War I. The Calypso
sank after the Circé collided with it on 7
July 1914 off Toulon. The Circé operated
in the Adriatic during the war, sinking the
German submarine UC-24 on 25 May
1917 and itself succumbing to a torpedo
attack by the German U-47 on 20 Sep-
tember 1918.

P L U V I Ô S E CLASS (1907)

Pluviôse (27 May 1907), Vendémiaire (7 July
1907), Ve n t ô s e (15 September 1907),
G e r m i n a l (7 December 1907), F l o r é a l
(18 April 1908), P r a i r i a l (26 September
1908), M e s s i d o r (24 December 1908),
T h e r m i d o r (3 July 1909), Fr u c t i d o r ( 1 3
November 1909)
B u i l d e r : Cherbourg
Pa p i n (4 January 1908), Fr e s n e l (16 June
1908), B e r t h e l o t (19 May 1909), Wa t t
(18 June 1909), C u g n o t (14 October
1909), Giffard (10 February 1910)
B u i l d e r : Rochefort
M o n g e (31 December 1908), A m p è r e ( 3 0
October 1909), G a y - L u s s a c (17 March
1910)
B u i l d e r : Toulon
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 398 tons (surfaced), 550
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 167940 x 16940 x 16930
M a c h i n e r y : 2 triple expansion engines,
2 du Temple boilers, 2 electric motors,
2 shafts. 700 ihp/450 shp = 12/8 knots
R a n g e : 1500 nm at 9 knots surfaced,
50 nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 1 x 450mm torpedo tube
(bow), 6 x 450mm torpedoes (2 x
Drzewiecki drop-collars, 2 x external cra-
dles forward, 2 x external cradles aft), to-
tal 8 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 24
N o t e s : Laubeuf reverted to steam surface
propulsion for this large class of high-
seas submarines, which proved very
successful in service despite their slow
diving time. In May 1910 the Ve n t ô s e
cruised 1000 nautical miles in six days
without replenishment. The internal bow
torpedo tube was removed from all boats
except the F l o r é a l , t h e G e r m i n a l , t h e
M o n g e , and the Ve n t ô s e prior to Wo r l d
War I as a result of an operational acci-
dent aboard the Fresnel on 5 October
1908 that ﬂooded the boat.
These boats saw extensive service in
the English Channel and the Mediter-
ranean before World War I. The Pluviôse
was rammed and sunk near Calais by the
cross-channel steamer Pas-de-Calais o n
26 May 1910 with the loss of the entire82 E A R LY SUBMARINES: FRANCE

c r e w, but it was salved and returned to
service. During World War I these boats
operated extensively in the A d r i a t i c .
Austro-Hungarian aircraft and surface
ships surprised the Fresnel off Cattaro on
5 December 1915, driving it ashore. The
destroyer Warasdiner destroyed it with
g u n f i r e . While attacking the A u s t r o -
Hungarian cruiser Helgoland and ﬁve de-
stroyers as they sortied from Cattaro on
29 December 1915, the Monge itself was
rammed by the cruiser, forced to the
surface, and sunk by gunfire. Only one
crewmember survived when the Vendémi-
aire was rammed and sunk by the battle-
ship Saint-Louis in the English Channel
on 8 June 1912. The Prairial sank after
colliding with the British steamer Tropic
off Le Havre on 29 April 1918. The Brit-
ish armed boarding ship Hazel a c c i d e n-
t a l l y rammed and sank the Floréal o f f
Mudros on 2 August 1918. The surviving
boats were stricken in November and De-
cember 1919.

A R C H I M È D E (4 AUGUST 1909)

B u i l d e r : Cherbourg
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 598 tons (surfaced), 810
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 197900 x 18950 x 13970
M a c h i n e r y : 2 triple expansion engines,
2 du Temple boilers, 2 electric motors,
2 shafts. 1700 ihp/1230 shp = 15/11
knots
R a n g e : 1160 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 100
nm at 4.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 1 x 450mm torpedo tube (bow),
6 x 450mm torpedoes (4 x Drzewiecki
drop-collars, 2 x external cradles), total
8 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 26
N o t e s : Julien Hutter was responsible for
this boat’s design as an expanded version
of Laubeuf’s successful submarines of
the Pluviôse class.
Before World War I, the A r c h i m è d e
operated in the English Channel and
Atlantic. It then operated with British
submarines based at Harwich until mid-
1915. The Archimède transferred to the
Adriatic for the remainder of the war,
where it sank four A u s t r o - H u n g a r i a n
transports. It was stricken on 12 Novem-
ber 1919.

CHARLES BRUN (14 SEPTEMBER 1910)

B u i l d e r : Toulon
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 356 tons (surfaced), 450
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 144940 x 13910 x 109100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Indret steam engines, 2
Schneider accumulators and alternators,
2 shafts. 1300/200 shp = 13.5/7.25 knots
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 450mm torpedo tube (bow),
4 x 450mm torpedoes (2 x Drzewiecki
drop-collars, 2 x external cradles aft), to-
tal 8 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 24
N o t e s : Maurice Just designed this boat
with its experimental power plant. Prob-
lems with the Charles Brun’s power plant
kept it from active service. It was stricken
on 7 June 1920.E A R LY SUBMARINES: FRANCE 83

B R U M A I R E CLASS (1911)

Brumaire (29 April 1911), Frimaire (26 Au-
gust 1911), N i v ô s e (6 January 1912),
Foucault (15 June 1912), Euler (12 Octo-
ber 1912), Franklin (22 March 1912)
B u i l d e r : Cherbourg
B e r n o u i l l i (1 June 1911), Joule (7 Septem-
ber 1911), C o u l o m b (13 June 1912),
A r a g o (29 June 1912), C u r i e (18 July
1912), Le Verrier (31 October 1912)
B u i l d e r : Toulon
Faraday (27 June 1911), Volta (23 Septem-
ber 1911), N e w t o n (20 should 1912),
Montgolﬁer (18 April 1912)
B u i l d e r : Rochefort
[United Kingdom]—W- 1 (19 November
1914), W-2 (15 February 1915), W-3 (1
April 1915), W-4 (25 November 1915)
B u i l d e r : Armstrong
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 397 (W- 3 and W- 4 : 3 2 1 )
tons (surfaced), 551 (W-3 and W-4: 479)
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 1709110 x 17990 x 1092.0 (W-
3 and W-4: 1499110 x 179100 x 9940)
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 840 bhp/660 shp =
13/9 knots
R a n g e : 1700 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 84
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 1 x 450mm torpedo tube
(bow), 6 x 450mm torpedoes (4 x
Drzewiecki drop-collars, 2 x external cra-
dles), total 8 torpedoes (W-1 and W-2: 2
x 180 torpedo tubes [bow], 4 x 180 torpe-
does [4 x Drzewiecki drop-collars], total 6
torpedoes; W-3 and W-4: 2 x 180 torpedo
tubes [bow], total 4 torpedoes)
C o m p l e m e n t : 29
N o t e s : Laubeuf produced this class as a
diesel-engined version of his earlier
steam-powered Pluviôse class boats. The
engines were MAN diesels built by
French manufacturers under license and
much more reliable than earlier units.
The later pair of British boats used a de-
sign modiﬁed by Laubeuf himself. Most
French boats received a single 47mm or
75mm deck gun during 1916. The later
pair of British boats added single 30 A A
guns on completion, and the earlier pair
received single 30 AA guns when they
transferred to Italian service.
All the French boats served in the
Mediterranean prior to World War I and
were very active in the Dardanelles and
Adriatic thereafter. The Curie succeeded
in entering Pola on 20 December 1914
but was trapped in the net barrage,
forced to surface in the harbor, and
captured. Lieutenant Georg von Tr a p p
commissioned the submarine into the
Austro-Hungarian Navy as the U-14 on
1 June 1915. Already successful, he went
on to become the leading A u s t r o -
Hungarian submarine ace. The Fr e n c h
repossessed their submarine and put it
back into service at the end of World War
I. The Joule struck a Turkish mine in the
Dardanelles on 1 May 1915 and was lost
with all hands. Austro-Hungarian flying
boats bombed the Foucault off Cattaro
on 15 September 1915, forcing it to the
surface, where it was abandoned and
scuttled, the first aircraft victory over a
submarine. The Bernouilli torpedoed the
Austro-Hungarian destroyer Csepel i n
Cattaro harbor on 4 April 1916 without
sinking it. It was lost to a mine off
Durazzo on 13 February 1918. The sur-
viving boats were stricken in the 1920s.
The British boats operated only brieﬂy
in the Royal Navy and were sold to Italy
in July 1916. In Italian service they oper-
ated extensively in the Adriatic, the W-4
being lost, probably to a mine, off Cape
Rodoni between 4 and 6 August 1917.84 E A R LY SUBMARINES: FRANCE

D E L F I N CLASS (1911)

[ G r e e c e ] —D e l f i n (1911), X i f i a s ( 1 9 1 2 ) ,
[Peru]—- Ferre (1912), Palacios (1913)
B u i l d e r : Schneider
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 310 tons (surfaced), 460
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 164900 x 15950 x 9900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Schneider-Carels diesel en-
gines, 2 Schneider electric motors, 2
shafts. 720 bhp/460 shp = 13/8.5 knots
A r m a m e n t : 1 x 450mm torpedo tube
(bow), 4 x 450mm torpedoes (Drzewiecki
drop-collars), total 6 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 24
N o t e s : These were Laubeuf boats for ex-
port. Pe r u ’s boats saw little operational
service because of shortages of batteries
and spare parts, and they were stricken in
1919. The Greek boats were in action
during the Balkan War, during which the
Delﬁn made an unsuccessful attack on 9
December 1912 against the Tu r k i s h
cruiser Medjidieh outside the Dard-
anelles. They served under French com-
mand in 1917–1918, returned to Greek
control, and were stricken in 1920.

M A R I O T T E (2 FEBRUARY 1911)

B u i l d e r : Cherbourg
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 531 tons (surfaced), 627
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 210930 x 14910 x 12960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Sautter-Harlé diesel en-
gines, 2 Breguet electric motors, 2 shafts.
1400 bhp/1000 shp = 14.25/11.5 knots
R a n g e : 1050 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 100
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 450mm torpedo tubes
(bow), 2 x 450mm torpedoes (Drzewiecki
drop-collars), total 8 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 29
N o t e s : This large single-hull submarine,
designed by Charles Radiguet, was simi-
lar to the earlier Émeraude class but fea-
tured a large forward casing to improve
sea-keeping.
The Mariotte transferred from the En-
glish Channel to the Mediterranean late
in 1914 and operated in the Dardanelles
until it was caught in Turkish net de-
fenses on 27 July 1915, forced to surface,
and sunk by shore artillery.

AMIRAL BOURGEOIS (25 NOVEMBER 1912)

B u i l d e r : Rochefort
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 556 tons (surfaced), 735
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 184950 x 18910 x 12900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Schneider diesel engines, 2
SEE electric motors, 2 shafts. 1400
bhp/1000 shp = 13.75/8.5 knots
R a n g e : 2500 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 100
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 450mm torpedo tube (2
bow, 2 stern), total 8 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 25
N o t e s : A large, long-range, double-hull
submarine designed by Bourdelle. Prob-
lems with the diesel engines caused con-
siderable delays in its entry into service. A
65mm deck gun was fitted in A u g u s t
1917. The Amiral Bourgeois operated in
the English Channel throughout its ca-
reer and was stricken on 12 November
1919.E A R LY SUBMARINES: FRANCE 85

C L O R I N D E CLASS (1913)

C l o r i n d e (2 October 1913), C o r n é l i e ( 2 9
October 1913)
B u i l d e r : Rochefort
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 413 tons (surfaced), 567
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 1769100 x 16990 x 11920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN-Loire diesel engines,
2 Nancy electric motors, 2 shafts. 800
bhp/700 shp = 13/9 knots
R a n g e : 1300 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 100
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 450mm torpedoes (6 x
Drzewiecki drop-collars, 2 external
cradles)
C o m p l e m e n t : 29
N o t e s : These boats were essentially Hut-
ter’s enlargement of Laubeuf’s Brumaire
design. Single 75mm deck guns were ﬁt-
ted when these boats entered service in
1916.
The boats operated in the Atlantic and
English Channel until they were stricken
on 20 December 1926.

G U S TAVE ZÉDÉ (20 MAY 1913)

B u i l d e r : Cherbourg
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 849 tons (surfaced), 1098
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 242990 x 19980 x 12920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Delaunay-Belleville triple
expansion engines, 2 du Temple boilers,
2 Schneider electric motors, 2 shafts.
3500 ihp/1640 shp = 17.5/11.5 knots
R a n g e : 1400 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 135
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 450mm torpedo tube (4
forward, 1 twin trainable external mount
aft), 2 x 450mm torpedoes (external Si-
monot cradles), total 10 torpedoes, 1 x
75mm gun, 1 x 47mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 47
N o t e s : Jean Simonot designed this long-
range, high-seas submarine for diesel
engines but recast it for a steam plant be-
cause the diesels proved less powerful
than anticipated. The Gustave Zédé w a s
reconstructed in 1921 to 1922. Tw o
MAN 1200-bhp diesel engines from the
surrendered German U-165 replaced the
steam plant, a large new bridge and con-
ning tower were fitted, and two ballast
tanks were converted to fuel bunkers.
The Gustave Zédé operated in the
Adriatic during World War I and in the
Atlantic after the war. It was stricken on
26 April 1937.86 E A R LY SUBMARINES: FRANCE

A R M I D E CLASS (1913)

Armide (11 November 1913), [Japan]—No.
15 (7 April 1916)
B u i l d e r : Schneider
Amazone (August 1916), Antigone (October
1916)
B u i l d e r : Gironde
[Japan]—No. 14 (28 March 1918)
B u i l d e r : Kure
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 457 tons (surfaced), 670
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 184950 x 17910 x 99100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Schneider-Carels diesel en-
gines, 2 Schneider electric motors, 2
shafts. 2200 bhp/900 shp = 17.5/11
knots
R a n g e : 2600 nm at 11 knots surfaced, 160
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 450mm (Japanese boats:
180) torpedo tubes (2 bow, 2 stern), (No.
14: 2 x 180 torpedoes [external cradles] in
addition), total 6/8 torpedoes. (Armide: 6
x 450mm torpedo tubes [2 bow, 4 train-
able external mounts], total 8 torpedoes)
C o m p l e m e n t : 31
N o t e s : These were Laubeuf export boats
ordered from Schneider for Japan and
Greece. The Armide was requisitioned on
3 June 1915, the two others on 30 May
1917.
All three French boats operated in the
Mediterranean throughout their careers.
The Antigone was stricken on 31 August
1927 and the two others on 27 A u g u s t
1935. The Japanese boats were stricken
on 1 December 1928.

N É R É I D E (9 MAY 1914)

B u i l d e r : Cherbourg
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 849 tons (surfaced), 1098
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 242990 x 19980 x 12920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Schneider-Carels diesel en-
gines, 2 Schneider electric motors, 2
shafts. 2400 bhp/1640 shp = 17.25/10.5
knots
R a n g e : 3120 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 90
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 450mm torpedo tube (4
forward, 1 twin trainable external mount
aft), 2 x 450mm torpedoes (external
Simonot cradles), total 10 torpedoes, 1 x
75mm gun, 1 x 47mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 47
N o t e s : The Néréide was completed to Si-
monot’s original design for a long-range,
high-seas submarine. The Néréide r e-
ceived a large new bridge and conning
t o w e r, similar to the Gustave Zédé’s, in
1921–1922.
The Néréide operated in the A t l a n t i c
throughout its career until it was stricken
on 27 August 1935.E A R LY SUBMARINES: FRANCE 87

A M P H I T R I T E CLASS (1914)

Amphitrite (9 June 1914), Astrée (6 Decem-
ber 1915)
B u i l d e r : Rochefort
A r i a n e (5 September 1914), A n d r o m a q u e
(13 February 1915)
B u i l d e r : Cherbourg
Atalante (14 April 1915), Artémis (14 Octo-
ber 1915), A m a r a n t e (11 November
1915), Aréthuse (20 April 1916)
B u i l d e r : Toulon
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 414 tons (surfaced), 609
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 1769100 x 17990 x 109100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2
Nancy electric motors, 2 shafts. 800
bhp/700 shp = 13/9.5 knots
R a n g e : 1300 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 100
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 450mm torpedoes (6 x
Drzewiecki drop-collars, 2 external
c r a d l e s )
C o m p l e m e n t : 29
N o t e s : This was Hutter’s modestly im-
proved version of his Clorinde d e s i g n ,
powered by French license-built MAN
diesel engines. The Amarante and the As-
t r é e were modified after launching as
minelayers with ten Normand-Fe n a u x
system vertical tubes in their ballast
tanks amidships, increasing their dis-
placement to 440 tons surfaced and 610
tons submerged. All the other boats en-
tered service fitted with single 47mm
deck guns, replaced in 1916 by 75mm
weapons.
All this class served in the Mediter-
ranean and Adriatic. The Ariane was tor-
pedoed and sunk by the German UC-22
off Cape Bon on 19 June 1917. The sur-
viving boats were stricken in the late
1920s and early 1930s.

B E L L O N E CLASS (1914)

Bellone (8 July 1914)
B u i l d e r : Rochefort
G o r g o n e (23 December 1915), H e r m i o n e
(15 March 1917)
B u i l d e r : Toulon
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 523 tons (surfaced), 788
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 216960 x 17990 x 11960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 St.-Etienne diesel engines,
2 electric motors, 2 shafts. 1640 bhp/800
shp = 14.75/9 knots
R a n g e : 2300 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 100
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 450mm torpedo tubes (2
b o w, 2 stern, 4 trainable external
mounts), total 8 torpedoes, 1 x 75mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 38
N o t e s : Hutter enlarged and improved his
Clorinde design for this class. Po s t w a r,
these boats received upgraded periscopes
and new 1200-bhp Sulzer diesel engines
and other equipment changes that led to
faster diving times.
The Gorgone and the Hermione oper-
ated in the Adriatic during World War I,
while the Bellone served in the Atlantic.
They then were in the Mediterranean
Fleet until stricken on 27 August 1935.88 E A R LY SUBMARINES: FRANCE

DUPUY DE LÔME CLASS (1915)

Dupuy de Lôme (9 September 1915), S a n é
(27 January 1916)
B u i l d e r : Toulon
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 849 tons (surfaced), 1098
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 246910 x 21900 x 119100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 triple expansion engines, 2
du Temple boilers, 2 Belfort electric mo-
tors, 2 shafts. 3500 ihp/1640 shp = 17/11
knots
R a n g e : 2350 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 120
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 450mm torpedo tubes (4
forward, 2 aft, 2 trainable external
mounts), total 8 torpedoes, 1 x 75mm
gun, 1 x 65mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 43
N o t e s : Hutter substantially enlarged his
Archimède design and powered it with
the Gustave Zédé’s steam plant to create
this class. In the early 1920s these boats
received new, enlarged bridges and con-
ning towers. Two 1200-bhp diesel en-
gines and four Siemens 664-shp electric
motors from former German U-boats re-
placed their original power plants.
Both boats were based at Gibraltar
during World War I. Po s t w a r, they oper-
ated mainly in the Atlantic until they
were stricken on 27 August 1935.

D I A N E CLASS (1915)

Daphné (20 October 1915), Diane (30 Sep-
tember 1916)
B u i l d e r : Cherbourg
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 633 tons (surfaced), 891
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 223910 x 18910 x 12920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 Sabathé
electric motors, 2 shafts. 1800 bhp/1400
shp = 17/11.5 knots
R a n g e : 2500 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 130
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 450mm torpedo tubes (4
forward, 2 aft) 4 x 450mm torpedoes (ex-
ternal Simonot cradles), total 12 torpe-
does, 1 x 75mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 43
N o t e s : This was a diminutive version of
Simonot’s Néréide design. Both boats op-
erated in the Atlantic. The Diane was lost
to an internal explosion off La Pallice on
11 February 1918. The Daphné w a s
stricken on 27 August 1935.

J O E S S E L CLASS (1917)

Joessel (21 July 1917), Fulton (1 April 1919)
B u i l d e r : Cherbourg
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 870 tons (surfaced), 1247
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 242990 x 21900 x 119100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Schneider-Carels diesel en-
gines, 2 Nancy electric motors, 2 shafts.
2700 bhp/1640 shp = 16.5/11 knots
R a n g e : 4300 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 125
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 450mm torpedo tubes (4
forward, 2 aft, 2 trainable external
mounts), total 10 torpedoes, 2 x 75mm
guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 47E A R LY SUBMARINES: FRANCE 89

N o t e s : These boats were originally de-
signed by Simonot as slightly enlarged
versions of his Néréide, powered by two
2000-shp Parsons geared steam turbines
but recast with diesel engines. Six addi-
tional planned boats were canceled. They
were fitted with enlarged bridges and
conning towers plus upgraded periscopes
in the 1920s.
Both boats operated in the A t l a n t i c
until the early 1930s, when they trans-
ferred to Indo-China. They were stricken
in May 1936.

L A G R A N G E CLASS (1917)

L a g r a n g e (31 May 1917), R o m a z o t t i ( 3 1
March 1918), Regnault (25 June 1924)
B u i l d e r : Toulon
Laplace (12 August 1919)
B u i l d e r : Rochefort
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 920 tons (surfaced), 1318
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 246990 x 20980 x 119100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Sulzer diesel engines, 2
Belfort electric motors, 2 shafts. 2600
bhp/1640 shp = 16.5/11 knots
R a n g e : 4300 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 125
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 450mm torpedo tubes
(4 forward, 2 aft, 2 trainable external
mounts), total 10 torpedoes, 2 x 75mm
g u n s
C o m p l e m e n t : 47
N o t e s : Originally designed by Hutter as
slightly enlarged versions of his Dupuy de
Lôme powered by two 2000-shp Parsons
geared steam turbines but recast with
diesel engines. They were ﬁtted with en-
larged bridges and conning towers plus
upgraded periscopes in the 1920s.
These boats operated in the Mediter-
ranean throughout their careers. They
were stricken between 1937 and 1939.

O ’ B Y R N E CLASS (1919)

O’Byrne (22 May 1919), Henri Fournier (30
September 1919), Louis Dupetit-Thouars
(12 May 1920)
B u i l d e r : Gironde
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 342 tons (surfaced), 513
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 172900 x 15950 x 8960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Schneider-Carels diesel en-
gines, 2 Schneider electric motors, 2
shafts. 1020 bhp/400 shp = 14/8 knots
R a n g e : 1850 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 55
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 450mm torpedo tubes (for-
ward), total 6 torpedoes, 1 x 47mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 25
N o t e s : These Laubeuf export boats were
ordered by Romania from Schneider and
requisitioned in 1917. They were com-
pleted with enlarged bridges and conning
towers.
All three boats served in the Mediter-
ranean throughout their careers. The
Louis Dupetit-Thouars was stricken on 9
November 1928, the other two in August
1935.90 E A R LY SUBMARINES: GERMANY

G E R M A N Y
[ R U S S I A ] —FORELLE (8 JUNE 1903)

B u i l d e r : Germania
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 16 tons (surfaced), 17
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 43900 x 7900 x 7900
M a c h i n e r y : 1 electric motor, 1 shaft. 60
shp = 5.5 knots
R a n g e : 25 nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 450mm torpedo tubes, to-
tal 2 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : N/A
N o t e s : Raimondo Lorenzo D’E q u e v i l l e y -
Montjustin designed this single-hull boat
as an experimental craft. It featured in-
ternal ballast and compensating tanks,
ﬁxed angled aft planes, and movable for-
ward units for dive control. The torpedo
tubes were external and launched torpe-
does using compressed air. This subma-
rine was designed to be carried into
action aboard a surface ship and
launched close to its target; hence the
absence of a separate surface propulsion
system. The Imperial Russian Navy pur-
chased the boat in April 1904 for service
in the war against Japan. It operated out
of Vladivostok from August 1904 until it
sank in an accident in 1910.

K A R P CLASS (1905)

[Russia]—Karp (30 August 1905), Karas (12
June 1906), K a m b a l a (16 March 1907),
[Norway]—Kobben (5 May 1909)
B u i l d e r : Germania
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 207 tons (surfaced), 235
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 130900 x 9900 x 8980
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Körting kerosene (K o b b e n-
Körting diesel) engines, 2 electric mo-
tors, 2 shafts. 400 bhp/200 (Kobben: 450
bhp/250) shp = 10/8.5 knots
R a n g e : 1250 nm at 9 knots surfaced, 50
nm at 6.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : Russian boats: 1 x 450mm tor-
pedo tube, 2 x 450mm torpedoes
(Drzewiecki drop-collars), total 3 torpe-
does. K o b b e n : 3 x 180 torpedo tubes (2
bow, 1 stern). Total 4 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 28
N o t e s : D’Equevilley-Montjustin also de-
signed this class of double-hull boats
whose form was optimized for surface
cruising. The design represented a radi-
cal departure from the experimental
Fo r e l l e and owed much to data that
Krupp received during abortive license
negotiations with Simon Lake. They had
internal saddle ballast tanks, compensat-
ing tanks at each end, and diving planes
fore and aft. The K o b b e n was an im-
proved version of the original type for
Russia.
The Russian boats were transferred by
rail to Odessa on the Black Sea in 1908.
The battleship Pa n t e l e i m o n a c c i d e n t a l l y
rammed and sank the K a m b a l a on 30
May 1909. The two other boats were
hulked at Sevastopol in May 1917 and
scuttled there on 26 April 1919.
The Kobben became the A-1 in 1913.
After serving primarily as a training ves-
sel, it was sold for scrap in 1933.E A R LY SUBMARINES: GERMANY 91

U - 1 CLASS (1906)

U - 1 (4 August 1906), [Austria-Hungary]—
U - 3 (20 August 1908), U - 4 (20 Novem-
ber 1908)
B u i l d e r : Germania
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 238 tons (surfaced), 283
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 138990 x 12960 x 10960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Körting kerosene engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 400 bhp/400
shp = 10.75/8.75 knots (Austrian boats:
600 bhp/320 shp = 12/8.5 knots)
R a n g e : 1500 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 50
nm at 5 knots submerged (Austrian
boats: 40 nm at 3 knots submerged)
A r m a m e n t : 1 (Austrian boats: 2) x 450mm
torpedo tube(s), total 3 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 18
Notes: This class was a modest enlargement
of D9E q u e v i l l e y - M o n t j u s t i n’s previous
double-hull design. The U - 1 operated pri-
marily as a trials and training vessel. It was
stricken in 1919, purchased by Krupp, and
donated to the Deutsches Museum in Mu-
nich for exhibit. The A u s t r o - H u n g a r i a n
boats were modiﬁed with ﬁxed aft planes
and no planes at the bow. They served ex-
tensively during World War I. The U - 3 w a s
sunk by the French destroyer B i s s o n on 13
August 1915 after an abortive attack on
the Italian armed merchant cruiser Citta di
C a t a n i a . The U - 4 sank the Italian armored
cruiser Giuseppe Garibaldi on 18 July
1915. It was ceded to France at the end of
the war and scrapped in 1920.

U - 2 (18 JUNE 1908)

B u i l d e r : Kiel
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 341 tons (surfaced), 430
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 1489110 x 18900 x 10920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Daimler kerosene engines,
2 electric motors, 2 shafts. 600 bhp/630
shp = 13.25/9 knots
R a n g e : 1600 nm at 13 knots surfaced, 50
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 450mm torpedo tubes (2
bow, 2 stern), total 6 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 22
N o t e s : Gustave Berling, of the Imperial
German Navy’s Unterseebootkonstruk-
tionsbüro, designed this double-hull boat
with saddle ballast tanks. It was opti-
mized for high surface speed and also
featured a much heavier torpedo arma-
ment than the earlier Germania design.
The U-2 operated primarily as a trials and
training vessel, survived World War I, and
was sold for scrap in 1919.92 E A R LY SUBMARINES: GERMANY

U - 3 CLASS (1909)

U-3 (27 March 1909), U-4 (18 May 1909)
B u i l d e r : Danzig
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 421 tons (surfaced), 510
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 168940 x 18940 x 10920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Körting kerosene engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 600 bhp/1030
shp = 11.75/9.5 knots
R a n g e : 1800 nm at 12 knots surfaced, 55
nm at 4.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 450mm torpedo tubes (2
bow, 2 stern), total 6 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 22
N o t e s : These boats were an enlarged ver-
sion of Berling’s earlier design and also
served primarily in trials and training
roles. The U-3 sank in the North Sea on
1 December 1918 while sailing to intern-
ment in Britain, and the U-4 was sold for
scrap in 1919.

U - 5 CLASS (1910)

U-5 (8 January 1910), U-6 (18 May 1910),
U - 7 (28 June 1910), U - 8 (14 March
1911)
B u i l d e r : Germania
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 505 tons (surfaced), 636
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 188900 x 18940 x 119100
M a c h i n e r y : 4 Körting kerosene engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 900 bhp/1040
shp = 13.5/10.25 knots
R a n g e : 1900 nm at 13 knots surfaced, 80
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 450mm torpedo tubes (2
bow, 2 stern), total 6 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 29
N o t e s : Hans Techel designed this class,
bringing together the best features of
earlier Germania and Unterseebootkon-
struktionsbüro boats. Apart from the
continued use of kerosene engines for
surface propulsion, they were the equals
of, or superior to, their foreign contem-
poraries, and were in front-line service at
the outbreak of World War I. The U - 5
was mined off Zeebrugge on 18 Decem-
ber 1914. The U-22 torpedoed and sank
the U-7 in error on 21 January 1915; the
British destroyers G h u r k a and M a o r i
sank the U - 8 near Dover on 4 March
1915; and the British submarine E - 1 6
torpedoed and sank the U - 6 off Sta-
vanger on 15 September 1915.E A R LY SUBMARINES: GERMANY 93

G E R M A N Y: U - 9 CLASS (1910)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

U - 9 (22 February 1910), U - 1 1 (2 A p r i l
1910), U-12 (6 May 1910), U-10 (24 Jan-
uary 1911)
B u i l d e r : Danzig
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 493 tons (surfaced), 611
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 188940 x 19980 x 10920
M a c h i n e r y : 4 Körting kerosene engines,
2 electric motors, 2 shafts. 1050
bhp/1160 shp = 14.25/8 knots
R a n g e : 1800 nm at 14 knots surfaced,
80 nm at 4.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 450mm torpedo tubes
(2 bow, 2 stern), total 6 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 29
N o t e s : Berling’s design for this class repre-
sented the Unterseebootkonstruktions-
büro’s response to the same requirements
as the U-5 class. They, too, were in front-
line service upon the outbreak of war.
The U - 9 sank three British armored
cruisers, the Aboukir, the Cressy, and the
H o g u e , on 22 September 1914 and sur-
vived the war to be scrapped in 1919. The
U-11 was mined off Zeebrugge on 9 De-
cember 1914; the British destroyers Ariel
and Attack sank the U-12 off the Scottish
coast on 10 March 1915; and the U - 1 0
probably was mined in the Gulf of Fin-
land in June 1916.94 E A R LY SUBMARINES: GERMANY

U - 1 3 CLASS (1910)

U - 1 3 (16 December 1910), U - 1 4 (11 June
1911), U-15 (18 September 1911)
B u i l d e r : Danzig
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 516 tons (surfaced), 644
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 1899110 x 19980 x 11920
M a c h i n e r y : 4 Körting kerosene engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 1200 bhp/1200
shp = 14.75/10.75 knots
R a n g e : 2000 nm at 14 knots surfaced, 90
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 450mm torpedo tubes (2
bow, 2 stern), total 6 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 29
N o t e s : This class was a modest improve-
ment of Berling’s previous design. The
British cruiser Birmingham rammed and
sank the U - 1 5 off Fair Isle on 9 A u g u s t
1914; the U - 1 3 was probably mined in
the Heligoland Bight on 12 August 1914;
the U - 1 4 was rammed and sunk by the
armed trawler H a w k near Peterhead on
1 June 1915.

U - 1 6 (23 AUGUST 1911)

B u i l d e r : Germania
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 489 tons (surfaced), 627
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 189980 x 19980 x 11920
M a c h i n e r y : 4 Körting kerosene engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 1200 bhp/1200
shp = 15.5/10.75 knots
R a n g e : 2100 nm at 15 knots surfaced, 90
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 450mm torpedo tubes (2
bow, 2 stern), total 6 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 29
N o t e s : The Germania equivalent of the U-
1 3 class, this boat survived the war and
sank in the North Sea on 8 Fe b r u a r y
1919 while under tow to Britain.

[ I TA LY ] —AT R O P O (22 MARCH 1912)

B u i l d e r : Germania
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 231 tons (surfaced), 320
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 146900 x 14950 x 89100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Germania diesel engines, 2
AEG electric motors, 2 shafts. 700
bhp/200 shp = 14.75/8 knots
R a n g e : 1440 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 70
nm at 4 knots
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 450mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 4 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 14
N o t e s : The A t r o p o was a diminutive of
Techel’s designs for the German Fleet. It
operated extensively in the Adriatic dur-
ing World War I and was scrapped in
1919.E A R LY SUBMARINES: GERMANY 95

U - 1 7 CLASS (1912)

U-17 (16 April 1912), U-18 (25 April 1912)
B u i l d e r : Danzig
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 564 tons (surfaced), 691
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 204990 x 19980 x 11920
M a c h i n e r y : 4 Körting kerosene engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 1400 bhp/1120
shp = 14.75/9.5 knots
R a n g e : 6700 nm at 8 knots surfaced,
75 nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 450mm torpedo tubes
(2 bow, 2 stern), total 6 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 29
N o t e s : These boats were further enlarge-
ments of Berling’s Unterseebootkon-
struktionsbüro design. The U - 1 8 w a s
sunk in the Pentland Firth by the trawler
Dorothy Gray and the destroyer Garry on
23 November 1914. The U-17 was used
for training from 1916 and was scrapped
in 1919.

G E R M A N Y: U - 1 9 CLASS (1912), U - 2 1 ( 1 9 1 3 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

U-19 (10 October 1912), U-20 (18 Decem-
ber 1912), U-21 (8 February 1913), U-22
(6 March 1913)
B u i l d e r : Danzig
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 650 tons (surfaced), 837
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 210980 x 20900 x 119100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 1700 bhp/1200 shp
= 15.5/9.5 knots
R a n g e : 7600 nm at 8 knots surfaced,
80 nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 500mm torpedo tubes
(2 bow, 2 stern), total 6 torpedoes, 1 x
88mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 35
N o t e s : This was the first German class
powered by diesel engines and was an en-
largement of the previous design for that
purpose. These boats also introduced
deck guns into the German submarine
ﬂeet. The U-19 stranded on Jutland on 4
November 1916. The other boats sur-
vived the war and were scrapped in
1919–1920, apart from the U-21, which
sank while under tow in the North Sea on
22 February 1919.96 E A R LY SUBMARINES: GERMANY

[ N O R WAY ] —A-2 CLASS (1913)

A-2 (1913), A-3 (1913), A-4 (1913), A-5 (9
May 1914)
B u i l d e r : Germania
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 268 tons (surfaced), 355
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 152970 x 15990 x 89100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Germania diesel engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 700 bhp/380
shp = 14.5/9 knots
R a n g e : 900 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 76
nm at 3.25 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 3 x 180 torpedo tubes (2 bow, 1
stern), total 5 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 17
N o t e s : These submarines were diminutives
of contemporary Germania boats for the
German Fleet. The A - 5 was undelivered
when World War I began and was taken
over as the German UA. It was used for
training from 1916 and was scrapped in
1919. The A - 2 was scrapped in 1940,
and the two other boats were scuttled on
16 April of the same year.

U - 2 3 CLASS (1913)

U-23 (12 April 1913), U-24 (24 May 1913),
U - 2 5 (12 July 1913), U - 2 6 (16 October
1913)
B u i l d e r : Germania
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 669 tons (surfaced), 864
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 212930 x 20980 x 11960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Germania diesel engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 1800 bhp/1200
shp = 16.75/10.25 knots
R a n g e : 7620 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 85
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 500mm torpedo tubes (2
b o w, 2 stern), total 6 torpedoes, 1 x
88mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 35
N o t e s : This class was an enlargement of
the earlier Germania type with diesel en-
gines and a deck gun. The British subma-
rine C - 2 7 torpedoed and sank the U - 2 3
off Fair Isle on 20 July 1915, and the U-
2 6 probably was mined in the Gulf of
Finland in September 1915. The two
other submarines were surrendered to
Britain and scrapped in 1921–1922.

U - 2 7 CLASS (1913)

U - 2 7 (14 June 1913), U - 2 8 (30 A u g u s t
1913), U - 2 9 (11 October 1913), U - 3 0
(15 November 1913)
B u i l d e r : Danzig
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 675 tons (surfaced), 867
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 210980 x 20900 x 119100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 2000 bhp/1200 shp
= 16.75/9.75 knots
R a n g e : 7900 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 85
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 500mm torpedo tubes (2
b o w, 2 stern), total 6 torpedoes, 1 x
88mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 35
N o t e s : With this design, derived from his
earlier types, Berling began to emphasize
short diving time, which was reduced to
80 seconds. Later in the war, boatsE A R LY SUBMARINES: GERMANY 97

carried two 88mm deck guns and could
stow up to ten torpedoes. The battleship
Dreadnought rammed and sank the U-29
in the Pentland Firth on 18 March 1915;
the Q-ship B a r a l o n g sank the U - 2 7 o f f
the Scilly Isles on 19 August 1915; the
U-28 was sunk by the explosion of its tar-
get, the ammunition ship Olive Branch,
off the North Cape on 2 September
1917. The U - 3 0 surrendered and was
scrapped in 1919.

G E R M A N Y: U - 3 1 CLASS (1914)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

U - 3 1 (7 January 1914), U - 3 2 (28 January
1914), U - 3 4 (9 May 1914), U-33 ( 1 9
May 1914), U - 3 5 (18 April 1914), U - 3 6
(6 June 1914), U - 3 7 (25 August 1914),
U-38 (9 September 1914), U-39 (26 Sep-
tember 1914), U-41 (10 October 1914),
U-40 (22 October 1914)
B u i l d e r : Germania
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 685 tons (surfaced), 878
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 212930 x 20980 x 119100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Germania diesel engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 1850 bhp/1200
shp = 16.5/9.75 knots
R a n g e : 7800 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 80
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 500mm torpedo tubes (2
b o w, 2 stern), total 6 torpedoes, 1 x
88mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 35
N o t e s : This class was the Germania equiv-
alent of the U-27 type and could dive in
100 seconds. From mid-1915 they car-
ried two 88mm guns, replaced in the sur-
viving boats by a single 105mm gun from
mid-1916. In 1915 the U - 3 1 p r o b a b l y
was mined of the east coast of Britain in
January; the British trawler Ste. Jemanne98 E A R LY SUBMARINES: GERMANY

rammed and sank the U-37 near Fécamp
on 30 March; the U - 4 0 was torpedoed
and sunk by the British submarine C-24
off Aberdeen on 23 June; the Q-ship
Prince Charles sank the U-36 in the He-
brides on 24 July; the Q-ship Wy a n d r a
sank the U-41 near the Scilly Isles on 24
S e p t e m b e r. In 1918 the British sloop
Wallﬂower sank the U-32 near Malta on
8 May; the U - 3 5 (the most successful
single U-boat in either world war, which
sank 224 ships totaling 535,900 gross
tons) and the U - 3 9 were interned in
Spain after action damage and subse-
quently scrapped; the U-34 was sunk by
the sloop Privet on 9 November.

U - 4 3 CLASS (1914)

U-43 (26 September 1914), U-44 (15 Octo-
ber 1914), U - 4 5 (15 April 1915), U - 4 6
(18 May 1915), U-47 (16 August 1915),
U - 4 8 (3 October 1915), U - 4 9 (26 No-
vember 1915), U - 5 0 (31 December
1915)
B u i l d e r : Danzig
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 725 tons (surfaced), 940
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 213930 x 20940 x 12920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 2000 bhp/1200 shp
= 15.25/9.75 knots
R a n g e : 8100 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 51
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 500mm torpedo tubes (2
b o w, 2 stern), total 6 torpedoes, 2 x
88mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 36
N o t e s : This class was the first of the
largely standardized Unterseebootkon-
struktionsbüro war mobilization types.
From mid-1916 they were fitted with a
single 105mm gun, and the U-43 and the
U - 4 4 were modified as minelayers. In
1917 the British destroyer O r a c l e
rammed and sank the U-44 off the Nor-
wegian coast on 12 August; the U-50 was
mined near Terschelling on 5 September;
the steamer British Tr a n s p o r t r a m m e d
and sank the U - 4 9 in the Bay of Biscay
on 11 September; the U - 4 5 was torpe-
doed and sunk by the British submarine
D - 7 in the Shetlands on 12 September;
the U-48 was driven ashore on the Good-
win Shoals by British trawlers and blown
up by its crew on 24 November. The U-
4 7 was scuttled off Pola on 28 October
1918. The U-43 and the U-46 were sur-
rendered after the war, the latter becom-
ing the Japanese O-2, and were scrapped
in 1922.E A R LY SUBMARINES: GERMANY 99

G E R M A N Y: TYPE U B - I, U B - 1 ( 1 9 1 5 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

U B - 1 (19 January 1915), U B - 2 (18 Fe b r u a r y
1915), U B - 3 (5 March 1915), U B - 4
(March 1915), U B - 5 (March 1915), U B - 6
(March 1915), U B - 7 (April 1915), U B - 8
(April 1915)
B u i l d e r : Germania
U B - 9 (6 February 1915), U B - 1 0 (20 Fe b r u-
ary 1915), U B - 1 1 (2 March 1915), U B - 1 2
(2 March 1915), U B - 1 3 (8 March 1915),
U B - 1 4 (25 March 1915), U B - 1 5 ( M a r c h
1915), U B - 1 7 (21 April 1915), U B - 1 6 ( 2 6
April 1915), [Austria-Hungary] – U - 1 5
(21 August 1915), U - 1 6 (28 A u g u s t
1915), U - 1 7 (3 September 1915)
B u i l d e r : Bremen
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 127 tons (surfaced), 142
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 92920 x 10960 x 99100
M a c h i n e r y : 1 diesel engine, 1 electric mo-
t o r, 1 shaft. 60 bhp/120 shp = 6.5/5.5
knots
R a n g e : 1500 nm at 5 knots surfaced, 45
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 450mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 2 torpedoes, 1 x 8mm ma-
chine gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 14
N o t e s : These small coastal boats were de-
signed for very rapid construction to op-
erate around the British Isles from bases
in Flanders. They featured a single hull
optimized for surface operation, internal
ballast and compensation tanks, diesel
drive using a small Körting engine al-
ready in mass production for use in mo-
tor launches, no compartmentation, and100 E A R LY SUBMARINES: GERMANY

two torpedo tubes forward arranged side
by side. The hull sections were designed
for easy rail transportation on only three
rail cars. The design of the ballast tanks
endowed them with a diving time of only
22 seconds. Production actually ex-
ceeded expectations: the intent was for
boats to take four months to build, but
the ﬁrst examples were delivered in only
seventy-ﬁve days.
In 1915 the UB-3 was lost in May in
the Gulf of Smyrna, and the Q-ship I n-
v e r l y o n sank the U B - 4 off Yarmouth on
15 August. During 1916 the British de-
stroyer A f r i d i and the drifter G l e a n e r
probably sank the U B - 1 3 off Zeebrugge
on 25 April, and the UB-7 failed to return
from a mission in the Black Sea in Sep-
t e m b e r. The U B - 6 ran aground on the
Dutch coast on 23 February 1917 and
was interned (it was scrapped postwar).
In 1918 the UB-17 probably was sunk by
the British CMB-20 off the coast of Flan-
ders on 18 March; the British submarine
E - 3 4 torpedoed and sank the U B - 1 6 o f f
Harwich on 10 May; the UB-13 failed to
return from a mission in the English
Channel in August; the UB-10 was scut-
tled at Zeebrugge on 5 October. The sur-
viving boats were surrendered at war’s
end and scrapped in 1920.
The UB-1 and the UB-15 were trans-
ferred to Austria-Hungary soon after
completion, becoming its U - 1 0 and U -
1 1 . The U - 1 6 sank the Italian destroyer
Nembo on 17 October 1916 but then was
rammed and sunk by the steamer B o r-
m i n d a , which the destroyer was escort-
ing. The other Austro-Hungarian boats
were surrendered at war’s end and
scrapped in 1920.
The UB-8 was transferred to Bulgaria
on 25 May 1916 and became its U-18. It
escaped to Bizerta in 1919 and was
scrapped there in 1921.

TYPE UC-I (1915)

U C - 1 1 (11 April 1915), U C - 1 2 (29 A p r i l
1915), U C - 1 3 (May 1915), U C - 1 4 ( 1 3
May 1915), UC-15 (19 May 1915)
B u i l d e r : Bremen
U C - 1 (26 April 1915), U C - 2 (12 May
1915), U C - 3 (28 May 1915), U C - 4 ( 6
June 1915), UC-5 (13 June 1915), UC-6
(20 June 1915), UC-7 (6 July 1915), UC-
8 (6 July 1915), U C - 9 (11 July 1915),
UC-10 (15 July 1915)
B u i l d e r : Hamburg
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 168 tons (surfaced), 183
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 111960 x 10940 x 10900
M a c h i n e r y : 1 diesel engine, 1 electric mo-
tor, 1 shaft. 90 bhp/175 shp = 6.25/5.25
knots
R a n g e : 780 nm at 5 knots surfaced, 50 nm
at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 100cm mine tubes, total
120 mines
C o m p l e m e n t : 14
N o t e s : Dr. Werner of the Torpedo Inspec-
torate was responsible for the design of
these small minelayers. They were based
on the UB-I type with inclined minelay-
ing tubes installed in a revised bow sec-
tion and uprated engines to compensate
for the greater weight and less stream-
lined lines. They were built very quickly
but suffered from problems with their
minelaying system, which could cause
the mines to arm before leaving the tubes
and explode prematurely.
During 1915 the steamer Cottingham
rammed and sank the UC-2 off Yarmouth
on 2 July; the UC-9 blew up on its own
mines in the North Sea on 21 October;E A R LY SUBMARINES: GERMANY 101

the U C - 8 grounded on the Dutch coast
on 14 November and was interned (it be-
came the Dutch M - 1 and was scrapped
in 1932); the U C - 1 3 wrecked in the
Black Sea on 29 November. The follow-
ing year the U C - 1 2’s own mines sank it
off Taranto on 16 March (Italy salved and
rebuilt it as the X - 1 , scrapped in 1919);
the UC-5 wrecked in the Thames estuary
on 27 April; the UC-3 and the UC-7 were
mined off Zeebrugge on 27 May and 5
J u l y, respectively; the British submarine
E-54 torpedoed and sank the UC-10 off
the Dutch coast on 21 August; the U C -
15 failed to return from a Black Sea pa-
trol in November. In 1917 the UC-1 was
mined off Nieuport on 19 July; the UC-6
was destroyed by British aircraft in the
Thames estuary on 27 September; the
U C - 1 4 was mined off Zeebrugge on 3
O c t o b e r. The U C - 1 1 was mined in the
English Channel on 16 June 1918, and
the UC-4 was blown up at Zeebrugge on
5 October.

U - 6 6 CLASS (1915)

U-66 (22 April 1915), U-67 (15 May 1915),
U - 6 8 (1 June 1915), U - 6 9 (24 June
1915), U-70 (20 June 1915)
B u i l d e r : Germania
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 791 tons (surfaced), 933
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 228900 x 20980 x 12960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Germania diesel engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 2300 bhp/1260
shp = 16.75/10.25 knots
R a n g e : 6500 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 115
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 5 x 450mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 1 stern), total 12 torpedoes, 1 x
88mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 36
N o t e s : The Austro-Hungarian Navy or-
dered these boats prior to the war, but
they were taken over by Germany in
1915. The Q-ship Fa r n b o r o u g h sank the
U - 6 8 off the Irish coast on 2 March
1916. In 1917 the U - 6 9 probably was
sunk by the British destroyer Pa t r i o t i n
the same area on 12 July, and the U - 6 6
probably was mined on the Dogger Bank
on 3 September. The two surviving boats
were surrendered after the war and
scrapped in 1920–1921.102 E A R LY SUBMARINES: GERMANY

U - 7 1 CLASS (1915)

U - 7 3 (16 June 1915), U - 7 4 (10 August 1915)
B u i l d e r : Danzig
U-71 (31 October 1915), U-72 (31 October
1915), U - 7 5 (31 January 1916), U - 7 6
(12 March 1916), U - 7 7 (9 January
1916), U-78 (27 February 1916), U-79 (9
April 1916), U-80 (22 April 1916)
B u i l d e r : Hamburg
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 755 tons (surfaced), 832
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 186940 x 19940 x 169100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 900 bhp/800 shp =
10.5/8 knots
R a n g e : 5800 nm at 7 knots surfaced, 83
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 500mm torpedo tubes (1
b o w, 1 stern), total 4 torpedoes, 2 x
100cm stern mine tubes, total 34 mines,
1 x 88mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 32
N o t e s : These single-hull saddle ballast
tank–type minelayers represented a de-
parture from the usual Unterseebootkon-
struktionsbüro double-hull design. They
were designed by Dr. Werner (also re-
sponsible for the Type UC-I coastal
minelayers) as simple, long-range craft.
Their arrangement, with the minelaying
tubes aft, caused considerable longitudi-
nal stability problems, and their engine
power was inadequate. Nevertheless,
they were quite successful boats.
In 1916, British antisubmarine
trawlers sank the U-74 off Peterhead on
27 May, and the U - 7 7 vanished in the
North Sea in July, possibly after striking
one of its own mines. The U - 7 6
foundered in heavy weather after action
damage off the North Cape on 22 Janu-
ary 1917; the U - 7 5 was mined off Te r-
schelling on 10 December; the U-78 was
torpedoed and sunk by the British sub-
marine G-2 in the Skagerrak on 28 Octo-
ber 1918. The U - 7 2 and the U - 7 3 w e r e
scuttled off Pola on 30 October 1918,
and the two other boats were surrendered
after the war and scrapped.

TYPE UB-II (1915)

GROUP I
UB-18 (21 August 1915), UB-19 (2 Septem-
ber 1915), UB-20 (26 September 1915),
U B - 2 1 (26 September 1915), U B - 2 2 ( 9
October 1915), UB-23 (9 October 1915)
B u i l d e r : Blohm und Voss
UB-24 (18 October 1915), UB-25 (22 No-
vember 1915), U B - 2 6 (14 December
1915), UB-28 (28 December 1915), UB-
29 (31 December 1915), UB-27 (10 Feb-
ruary 1916)
Builder: Bremen
GROUP II
U B - 3 0 (16 November 1915), U B - 3 1 ( 1 6
November 1915), U B - 3 2 (4 December
1915), U B - 3 3 (4 December 1915), U B -
34 (28 December 1915), UB-35 (28 De-
cember 1915), U B - 3 7 (28 December
1915), UB-39 (29 December 1915), UB-
3 6 (15 January 1916), U B - 3 8 (1 A p r i l
1916), U B - 4 0 (25 April 1916), U B - 4 1
(6 May 1916)
B u i l d e r : Blohm und VossE A R LY SUBMARINES: GERMANY 103

U B - 4 2 (4 March 1916), U B - 4 3 (8 A p r i l
1916), U B - 4 4 (20 April 1916), U B - 4 5
(12 May 1916), U B - 4 6 (31 May 1916),
UB-47 (17 June 1916)
B u i l d e r : Bremen
[ A u s t r i a - H u n g a r y ] —U - 2 7 (19 Oct 1916),
U-28 (8 Jan 1917), U-40 (21 Apr 1917),
U-41 (11 Nov 1917)
Builder: Pola
[ A u s t r i a - H u n g a r y ] —U - 2 9 (21 October
1916), U-30 (27 December 1916), U-31
(20 March 1917) U-32 (11 May 1917)
B u i l d e r : Fiume
D i s p l a c e m e n t : Group I: 263 tons (sur-
faced), 292 tons (submerged), Group II:
279 tons (surfaced), 305 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : Group I: 11895 ,0 Group II:
121900 x 14950 x 12920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. Group I: 270 bhp/280
shp, Group II: 284 bhp/280 shp = 9/5.75
knots
R a n g e : Group I: 6650 nm at 5 knots sur-
faced, Group II: 8150 nm at 5 knots sur-
faced, 45 nm at 4 knots
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 500mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 6 (Group I and A u s t r i a n
boats: 4) torpedoes, 1 x 50mm gun (Aus-
trian boats: 1 x 75mm gun, 1 x 8mm ma-
chine gun)
C o m p l e m e n t : 22
N o t e s : These boats were enlarged to ac-
commodate two-shaft machinery for
greater reliability and range, and the
single-hull design also featured saddle
ballast tanks to increase internal space
and forward diving planes to improve
control. Their greater size made them
more difﬁcult to transport by rail.
During 1916 the French destroyer
Trombe sank the UB-26 off Le Havre on
5 April; the UB-44 failed to return from a
patrol in the Aegean in August; the U B -
45 was mined in the Black Sea on 6 No-
vember; the Q-ship Pe n h u r s t sank the
UB-19 in the English Channel on 30 No-
vember; the British destroyer L a n d r a i l
sank the UB-29 off Bishop’s Rock on 15
December. The Penhurst sank the UB-37
in the English Channel on 14 January
1917; the UB-39 was mined off Dover on
15 May; the UB-36 was sunk off Ushant
on 20 May; the U B - 2 0 was mined off
Zeebrugge on 28 July; a British antisub-
marine vessel sank the U B - 2 7 in the
North Sea on 29 July; the UB-23 was in-
terned at La Coruna after serious action
damage on the same day; British aircraft
bombed and sank the U B - 3 2 in the
Thames estuary on 22 September; the
UB-41 was mined off Scarborough on 5
October; the British trawler Ben Lawer
rammed and sank the UB-18 in the En-
glish Channel on 9 December. The U B -
2 2 was mined in the North Sea on 19
January 1918; the British destroyer L e v e n
sank the U B - 3 5 near Calais on 26 Janu-
ary; the U B - 3 8 , the U B - 3 3 , and the U B -
3 1 were mined off Dover on 8 Fe b r u a r y,
11 April, and 2 May, respectively; British
trawlers sank the U B - 3 0 off Whitby on 13
August. The surviving boats were surren-
dered at war’s end and scrapped postwar.
The Austro-Hungarian U - 3 0 was lost
to unknown causes in the Straits of
Otranto in April 1917, and the other
boats were ceded to France and Italy and
scrapped after World War I.104 E A R LY SUBMARINES: GERMANY

U - 5 1 CLASS (1915)

U - 5 1 (25 November 1915), U - 5 2 (8 De-
cember 1915), U-53 (1 February 1916),
U - 5 4 (22 February 1916), U - 5 5 ( 1 8
March 1916), U-56 (18 April 1916)
B u i l d e r : Germania
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 715 tons (surfaced), 902
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 2139110 x 21900 x 119100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 2400 bhp/1200 shp
= 17/9 knots
R a n g e : 9000 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 55
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 500mm torpedo tubes (2
b o w, 2 stern), total 8 torpedoes, 2 x
88mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 35
N o t e s : This class was the first of the
largely standardized Germania war mobi-
lization types. From mid-1916 they were
ﬁtted with a single 105mm gun. In 1916
the British submarine H-5 torpedoed and
sank the U-51 in the Ems estuary on 14
J u l y, and the U - 5 6 disappeared off Lap-
land after suffering damage from Russian
antisubmarine vessels on 2 November.
The surviving boats were surrendered at
war’s end (the U-55 becoming the Japa-
nese O-3) and were scrapped in 1922.E A R LY SUBMARINES: GERMANY 105

G E R M A N Y: TYPE UC-II (1916), U C - 4 8 ( 1 9 1 6 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

UC-16 (1 February 1916), UC-22 (1 Febru-
ary 1916), U C - 1 7 (19 February 1916),
U C - 2 3 (19 February 1916), U C - 1 8 ( 4
March 1916), U C - 2 4 (4 March 1916),
UC-19 (15 March 1916), UC-20 (1 April
1916), U C - 2 1 (1 April 1916), U C - 3 4 ( 6
May 1916), UC-35 (6 May 1916), UC-37
(5 June 1916), U C - 3 8 (5 June 1916),
UC-36 (25 June 1916), UC-39 (26 June
1916), UC-65 (8 July 1916), UC-66 (15
July 1916), UC-67 (6 August 1916), UC-
6 9 (7 August 1916), U C - 7 0 (7 A u g u s t
1916), UC-68 (12 August 1916), UC-71
(12 August 1916), U C - 7 2 (12 A u g u s t
1916), UC-73 (26 August 1916)
B u i l d e r : Blohm und Voss
U C - 2 5 (10 June 1916), U C - 2 6 (22 June
1916), U C - 2 7 (28 June 1916), U C - 2 8 ( 8
July 1916), U C - 2 9 (15 July 1916), U C - 3 0
(27 July 1916), U C - 3 1 (7 August 1916),
U C - 3 2 (12 August 1916), U C - 3 3 (26 A u-
gust 1916), U C - 4 0 (5 September 1916),
U C - 4 1 (13 September 1916), U C - 4 2 ( 2 1
September 1916), U C - 4 3 (5 October
1916), U C - 4 4 (10 October 1916), U C - 7 4
(19 October 1916), U C - 4 5 (20 October
1916), U C - 7 5 (6 November 1916), U C -
7 6 (25 November 1916), U C - 7 7 (2 De-
cember 1916), U C - 7 8 (8 December
1916), U C - 7 9 (19 December 1916)
Builder: Hamburg
U C - 4 6 (15 July 1916), U C - 4 7 (30 A u g u s t
1916), U C - 4 8 (27 September 1916),
U C - 6 1 (11 November 1916), U C - 6 2 ( 9
December 1916), U C - 6 3 (6 January
1917), UC-64 (27 January 1917)
B u i l d e r : Bremen
UC-55 (2 August 1916), UC-56 (26 August
1916), U C - 5 7 (7 September 1916),
U C - 5 9 (28 September 1916), U C - 5 8106 E A R LY SUBMARINES: GERMANY

(21 October 1916), UC-60 (8 November
1916)
B u i l d e r : Danzig
UC-49 (7 November 1916), UC-50 (23 No-
vember 1916), U C - 5 1 (5 December
1916), UC-52 (23 January 1917), UC-53
(27 February 1917), U C - 5 4 (20 March
1917)
B u i l d e r : Germania
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 417 tons (surfaced), 480
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 162900 x 17920 x 12920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 500 bhp/460 shp =
11.5/7 knots
R a n g e : 7280–10,108 nm at 7 knots sur-
faced, 54 nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 3 x 500mm torpedo tubes (2
b o w, 1 stern), total 7 torpedoes, 6 x
100cm mine tubes, total 18 mines, 1 x
88mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 26
N o t e s : The design for the second series of
coastal minelayers paralleled that of the
UB-II type. It was enlarged to accommo-
date two-shaft machinery, a torpedo bat-
tery, and much greater range, allowing all
requirements for easy rail transportation
to be deleted. In service the problems
with the minelaying system proved not to
be wholly resolved.
The destroyer Ariel sank the U C - 1 9
southwest of Ireland on 6 December
1916. The destroyer Liberty rammed and
sank the UC-46 in the English Channel
on 8 February 1917; the destroyer
T h r a s h e r sank the U C - 3 9 in the North
Sea the same day; the Q-ship Lady Olive
sank the UC-18 in the English Channel
on 19 February (and itself sank from tor-
pedo damage); their own mines sank the
U C - 3 2 , the U C - 3 6 , the U C - 4 4 , and the
U C - 4 2 on 23 Fe b r u a r y, 19 May, 4
August, and 10 September, respectively;
the British submarine G-3 torpedoed the
UC-43 in the Atlantic on 10 March; the
British submarine C - 7 sank the U C - 6 8
off the Dutch coast on 5 April; the UC-
3 0 was mined near Horns Reef on 21
April; the destroyer M i l n e rammed and
sank the U C - 2 6 in the Thames estuary
on 8 May; the French submarine C i r c é
sank the UC-24 off Cattaro on 24 May;
the Q-ship Pargust sank the U C - 2 9 o f f
the Irish coast on 7 June; the trawler Sea
K i n g sank the U C - 6 6 in the English
Channel on 12 June; the U C - 6 1 r a n
aground and was destroyed by its crew on
26 July; the Q-ship A c t o n sank the U C -
7 2 in the Bay of Biscay on 20 A u g u s t ;
British trawlers sank the U C - 4 1 in the
Tay estuary the following day; the patrol
boat PC-61 rammed and sank the UC-33
in St. George’s Channel on 26 Septem-
ber; the U C - 2 1 , the U C - 1 6 , and the
UC-62 were mined in the English Chan-
nel in October; the submarine E-52 tor-
pedoed the UC-63 and the submarine C-
1 5 torpedoed the U C - 6 5 in the English
Channel on 1 November and 3 Novem-
ber; the UC-51 was mined in the English
Channel on 17 November; the patrol
boat P - 5 7 rammed and sank the U C - 4 7
in the English Channel on 18 November;
the UC-57 was mined in the Gulf of Fin-
land in November; the UC-69 sank after
a collision on 6 December; and the
French destroyers L a n s q u e n e t a n d
M a m e l u c k sank the U C - 3 8 in the Gulf of
Corinth on 14 December. During 1918
the destroyer N u b i a n sank the U C - 5 0 i n
the Straits of Dover on 4 February; the de-
stroyer L o y a l badly damaged the U C - 4 8 ,
which interned itself at Ferrol on 23
March; the U C - 7 9 , the U C - 7 8 , and the
U C - 6 4 were mined near Dover on 19E A R LY SUBMARINES: GERMANY 107

April, and 2 May, and 20 June, respec-
tively; the French patrol boat A i l l y s a n k
the UC-35 near Sardinia on 17 May; the
destroyer Fairy rammed and sank the UC-
7 5 in the North Sea on 31 May (itself
sinking because of the damage it suf-
fered); British drifters sank the UC-77 in
the Straits of Dover on 10 July; the de-
stroyer O p o s s u m sank the U C - 4 9 o f f
Berry Head on 8 August; the destroyer
O u s e sank the U C - 7 0 off Whitby on
28 August. The U C - 2 5 , the U C - 3 4 , t h e
U C - 5 3 , and the U C - 5 4 were scuttled in
the Adriatic on 28 October 1918. The
surviving boats were surrendered and
scrapped postwar.

U - 6 3 CLASS (1916)

U-63 (8 February 1916), U-64 (29 February
1916), U-65 (21 March 1916)
B u i l d e r : Germania
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 810 tons (surfaced), 927
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 224950 x 20980 x 13920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Germania diesel engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 2200 bhp/1200
shp = 16.5/9 knots
R a n g e : 8100 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 60
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 500mm torpedo tubes (2
b o w, 2 stern), total 8 torpedoes, 2 x
88mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 35
N o t e s : These Germania war mobilization
boats could dive in 50 seconds. They re-
ceived a single 105mm deck gun in 1917.
British antisubmarine vessels sank the
U - 6 4 off Cape Bon on 17 June 1918; the
U - 6 5 was scuttled at Pola on 28 October;
the U - 6 3 was surrendered and scrapped.

U - 5 7 CLASS (1916)

U-57 (19 April 1916), U-58 (31 May 1916),
U - 5 9 (20 June 1916), U - 6 0 (5 June
1916), U-61 (22 June 1916), U-62 (2 Au-
gust 1916), U-99 (27 January 1917), U-
100 (25 February 1917), U-101 (1 April
1917), U-102 (12 May 1917), U-103 (9
June 1917), U-104 (3 June 1917)
B u i l d e r : Bremen
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 786 tons (surfaced), 902
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 2139110 x 20980 x 12960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 1800 bhp/1200 shp
= 14.75/8.5 knots
R a n g e : 7730 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 55
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 500mm torpedo tubes (2
b o w, 2 stern), total 8 torpedoes, 2 x
88mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 35
N o t e s : These war mobilization boats were
built to a Germania design and could
dive in 50 seconds. The later boats were
reﬁtted with single 105mm guns. The U-
59 was mined off Horns Reef on 14 May
1917; the Cunard liner Va l e r i a r a m m e d
and sank the U - 9 9 southwest of Ireland
on 20 June; the U.S. destroyer Fa n n i n g
sank the U - 5 8 off Milford Haven on 17
N o v e m b e r. The British patrol boat P - 5 1
sank the U - 6 1 in St. George’s Channel
on 26 March 1918; the sloop Je s s a m i n e
sank the U-104 in the same location on
25 April; the liner Olympic rammed and
sank the U - 1 0 3 in the English Channel
on 11 May; the U - 1 0 2 failed to return
from a North Sea patrol in September.
The surviving boats were surrendered at
war’s end and scrapped in 1920.108 E A R LY SUBMARINES: GERMANY

U - 8 7 CLASS (1916)

U-87 (22 May 1916), U-88 (22 June 1916),
U - 8 9 (6 October 1916), U - 9 0 (12 Janu-
ary 1917), U - 9 1 (14 April 1917), U - 9 2
(12 May 1917)
B u i l d e r : Danzig
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 757 tons (surfaced), 998
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 224990 x 20940 x 12990
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 2400 bhp/1200 shp
= 15.5/8.5 knots
R a n g e : 8000 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 56
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 500mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern), total 12 torpedoes, 1 x
105mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 36
N o t e s : These submarines represented an
important advance on previous Untersee-
bootkonstruktionsbüro double-hull war
mobilization boats, featuring a heavier
torpedo armament and improved bow for
better sea-keeping. The U-88 was mined
off Terschelling on 5 September 1917,
and the sloop B u t t e r c u p rammed and
sank the U-87 in the Irish Sea on 25 De-
cember. The cruiser Roxborough rammed
and sank the U-89 off Malin Head on 12
February 1918, and the U-92 failed to re-
turn from a Bay of Biscay patrol in Sep-
t e m b e r. The two surviving boats were
surrendered and scrapped.

U - 8 1 CLASS (1916)

U-81 (24 June 1916), U-82 (1 June 1916),
U - 8 3 (13 June 1916), U - 8 4 (22 June
1916), U - 8 5 (22 August 1916), U - 8 6 ( 7
November 1916)
B u i l d e r : Germania
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 808 tons (surfaced), 946
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 230900 x 20980 x 13920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 2400 bhp/1200 shp
= 16.75/9 knots
R a n g e : 8100 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 56
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 500mm torpedo tubes (2
b o w, 2 stern), total 8 torpedoes, 2 x
88mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 35
N o t e s : These boats were a further im-
provement on the previous Germania de-
sign. The Q-ship Fa r n b o r o u g h sank the
U - 8 3 southwest of Ireland on 17 Fe b r u-
ary 1917; the British sloop P r i v e t s a n k
the U - 8 5 off Start Point on 12 March;
the British submarine E - 5 4 t o r p e d o e d
and sank the U - 8 1 off the Irish coast on
1 May; the patrol boat P C - 6 2 r a m m e d
and sank the U - 8 4 in St. George’s Chan-
nel on 26 January 1918. The two surviv-
ing boats were surrendered and
s c r a p p e d .E A R LY SUBMARINES: GERMANY 109

U - 9 3 CLASS (1916)

U - 9 3 (15 December 1916), U - 9 4 (5 January
1917), U - 9 5 (20 January 1917), U - 9 6 ( 1 5
February 1917), U - 9 7 (4 April 1917), U - 9 8
(28 February 1917), U - 1 0 5 (16 May
1917), U - 1 0 6 (12 June 1917), U - 1 0 7 ( 2 8
June 1917), U - 1 0 8 (11 October 1917), U -
1 0 9 (25 September 1917), U - 1 1 0 (28 June
1917), U - 1 1 1 (5 September 1917), U - 1 1 2
(26 October 1917), U - 1 1 3 (29 September
1917), U - 1 1 4 (27 November 1917)
B u i l d e r : Germania
U - 1 6 0 (27 February 1918), U - 1 6 1 ( 2 3
March 1918), U-162 (20 April 1918), U-
1 6 3 (1 June 1918), U - 1 6 4 (7 A u g u s t
1918), U - 1 6 5 (21 August 1918), U - 1 6 6
(6 Sep1918), U - 1 6 7 (28 September
1918), U-168 (19 October 1918)
B u i l d e r : Vegesack
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 838 tons (surfaced), 1000
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 2349110 x 20980 x 12990
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 2400 bhp/1200 shp
= 16.75/8.5 knots
R a n g e : 8300 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 50
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 500mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern), total 12 torpedoes, 1 x
105mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 36
N o t e s : This Germania design paralleled
the advances of the U - 8 7 class. The U -
1 6 9–U - 1 7 2 and the U - 2 0 1–U - 2 0 9 w e r e
broken up incomplete after the war,
while the U-210–U-212 were ordered but
never commenced construction.
The U - 1 0 6 was mined in Heligoland
Bight on 7 October 1917. The steamer
Braeniel rammed and sank the U-93 near
Lizard Point on 7 January 1918; the U-95
and the U-109 were mined in the Straits
of Dover on 19 January and 24 January,
respectively; the destroyer M i c h a e l s a n k
the U - 1 1 0 near Malin Head on 15
March. The surviving boats were surren-
dered at war’s end and scrapped with the
exception of the U - 1 0 5 , the U - 1 0 8 , t h e
U - 1 6 2 , and the U - 1 6 6 , which entered
French service as the Jean Au t r i c , t h e
Léon Mignot, the Pierre Marrest, and the
Jean Roulier and were discarded in 1937.110 E A R LY SUBMARINES: GERMANY

G E R M A N Y: TYPE UB-III (1917), U B - 6 4 ( 1 9 1 7 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

UB-48 (6 January 1917), UB-49 (6 January
1917), U B - 5 0 (6 January 1917), U B - 5 1
(8 March 1917), UB-52 (8 March 1917),
U B - 5 3 (9 March 1917), U B - 7 5 (5 May
1917), U B - 7 6 (5 May 1917), U B - 7 7 ( 5
May 1917), UB-78 (2 June 1917), UB-79
(3 June 1917), U B - 1 0 4 (1 July 1917),
U B - 1 0 3 (7 July 1917), U B - 1 0 5 (7 July
1917), U B - 1 0 9 (7 July 1917), U B - 1 0 6
(21 July 1917), U B - 1 0 7 (21 July 1917),
UB-108 (21 July 1917), UB-110 (1 Sep-
tember 1917), U B - 1 1 1 (1 September
1917), U B - 1 1 2 (15 September 1917),
U B - 1 1 3 (23 September 1917), U B - 1 1 4
(23 September 1917), U B - 1 1 5 (4 No-
vember 1917), U B - 1 1 6 ( N o v e m b e r
1917), UB-117 (21 November 1917)
B u i l d e r : Blohm und Voss
U B - 6 0 (14 April 1917), U B - 6 1 (28 A p r i l
1917), UB-62 (11 May 1917), UB-63 (26
May 1917), UB-64 (9 June 1917), UB-65
(26 June 1917), U B - 7 2 (30 July 1917),
U B - 7 3 (11 August 1917), U B - 7 4 ( 1 2
September 1917), UB-88 (11 December
1917), UB-89 (22 December 1917), UB-
90 (12 February 1918), UB-91 (6 March
1918), U B - 9 2 (25 March 1918), UB-93
(12 April 1918), UB-94 (26 April 1918),
U B - 9 5 (10 May 1918), U B - 9 6 (31 May
1918), U B - 9 7 (13 June 1918), U B - 9 8
(1 July 1918), U B - 9 9 (29 July 1918),
U B - 1 0 0 (13 August 1918), U B - 1 0 1 ( 2 7
August 1918), U B - 1 0 2 (13 September
1918), U B - 1 5 4 (7 October 1918),
UB-155 (26 October 1918)
B u i l d e r : Hamburg
U B - 5 4 (18 April 1917), U B - 5 5 (9 May
1917), UB-56 (6 June 1917), UB-57 (21
June 1917), UB-58 (5 July 1917), UB-59
(21 July 1917), UB-80 (4 August 1917),
UB-81 (18 August 1917), UB-82 (1 Sep-
tember 1917), U B - 8 3 (15 September
1917), U B - 8 4 (3 October 1917), U B - 8 6
(10 October 1917), U B - 8 5 (26 October
1917), UB-87 (10 November 1917), UB-
1 1 8 (13 December 1917), U B - 1 1 9 ( 1 3
December 1917), U B - 1 2 1 (6 January
1918), U B - 1 2 2 (2 February 1918), U B -
1 2 0 (23 February 1918), U B - 1 2 3 ( 2
March 1918), UB-126 (12 March 1918),
U B - 1 2 4 (19 March 1918), U B - 1 2 8 ( 1 0
April 1918), U B - 1 2 5 (16 April 1918),
U B - 1 2 7 (27 April 1918), U B - 1 2 9 ( 1 1
May 1918), UB-130 (27 May 1918), UB-
1 3 1 (4 June 1918), U B - 1 3 2 (22 June
1918), U B - 1 4 2 (23 July 1918), U B - 1 4 8E A R LY SUBMARINES: GERMANY 111

(7 August 1918), U B - 1 4 3 (21 A u g u s t
1918), U B - 1 4 9 (19 September 1918),
U B - 1 4 4 (5 October 1918), U B - 1 5 0 ( 1 9
October 1918), U B - 1 4 5 ( N o v e m b e r
1918), U B - 1 4 6 (November 1918),  U B -
147 (November 1918), UB-151 (Novem-
ber 1918), U B - 1 5 2 (November 1918),
UB-153 (November 1918)
B u i l d e r : Bremen
U B - 6 6 (31 May 1917), U B - 6 7 (16 June
1917), U B - 6 8 (4 July 1917), U B - 7 1 ( 1 2
July 1917), U B - 6 9 (7 August 1917), U B -
7 0 (17 August 1917), U B - 1 3 3 (27 Septem-
ber 1918), U B - 1 3 6 (27 September 1918),
U B - 1 3 7 (2 November 1918), U B - 1 3 8 ( 2
November 1918), U B - 1 3 9 (2 November
1918), U B - 1 4 0 (2 November 1918), U B -
1 4 1 (2 November 1918), U B - 1 3 4 ( N o v e m-
ber 1918), U B - 1 3 5 (November 1918)
B u i l d e r : Germania
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 516 tons (surfaced), 651
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 1 8 1950– 1 8 3930 x 19900 x
12920–12960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 1100 bhp/788 shp =
13.5/7.5 knots
R a n g e : 7200–9040 nm at 6 knots sur-
faced, 40 nm at 4.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 5 x 500mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 1 stern), total 10 torpedoes, 1 x
88mm (105mm from UB-88) gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 36
N o t e s : The design for this third group of
coastal submarines broke away from the
earlier pattern of simple single-hull ves-
sels with external saddle ballast tanks. In-
stead, the new boats essentially were
diminutives of contemporary war mobi-
lization submarines. An additional
ninety-eight boats were ordered but not
completed and were broken up on the
building ways after the war’s end.
The U B - 6 1 was mined off the Dutch
coast on 29 November 1917, and the
UB-56, the UB-75, and the UB-81 were
mined in the English Channel in Decem-
ber. The sloop Cyclamen sank the UB-69
near Bizerta on 9 January 1918; the sloop
C a m p a n u l a sank the U B - 6 6 off Cape
Bon on 18 January; the U B - 6 3 failed to
return from a patrol in the Irish Sea in
February; the UB-54 and the UB-58 were
mined in the Straits of Dover in March;
British drifters sank the U B - 8 2 in the
Irish Sea on 17 April; the motor launch
ML-413 sank the UB-71 in the Straits of
Gibraltar on 21 April; the U B - 5 5 w a s
mined in the Straits of Dover on 22 April;
the drifter Coreopsis sank the UB-85 off
Belfast Lough on 30 April; the U B - 7 0
failed to return from an Adriatic mission
in April; the U B - 1 1 9 was missing in the
Irish Sea during May; the steamer Queen
Alexandria rammed and sank the UB-78
in the English Channel on 9 May; the
submarine D - 4 torpedoed the U B - 7 2 i n
the English Channel on 12 May; the sub-
marine H - 4 torpedoed the U B - 5 2 o f f
Cattaro on 25 May; the armed yacht
Lorna sank the UB-74 in Lyme Bay on 26
May; the UB-108 was lost in the English
Channel during July; the UB-65 sank off
the Irish coast after an internal explosion
on 10 July; the destroyer Garry sank the
U B - 1 1 0 off Hartlepool on 19 July; the
destroyers Marne and Milbrook sank the
UB-124 in the Irish Sea on 20 July; the
destroyer Va n e s s a and the drifter C a l v i a
sank the UB-107 off Scarborough on 27
July; the U B - 5 3 was caught in the
Otranto mine barrage on 3 August and
scuttled by its crew; the U B - 5 7 and the
U B - 1 0 9 were mined in the Straits of
Dover in August; the U B - 1 0 3 and the
U B - 1 2 7 failed to return in September
from patrols and probably were mined in
the Northern Barrage, as were the U B -
156 on 25 September and the UB-123 on
19 October; the destroyer O p h e l i a s a n k112 E A R LY SUBMARINES: GERMANY

the U B - 8 3 in the Pentland Firth on 10
September; the destroyers Ouse and Star
sank the U B - 1 1 5 off Sunderland on 29
September; the steamer Queensland sank
the UB-68 (commanded by Karl Dönitz)
near Malta on 4 October; the U B - 1 1 3
probably was mined off Boulogne on 9
October; the submarine L - 1 2 t o r p e d o e d
the UB-90 off the Norwegian coast on 16
October; the U B - 1 1 6 was mined off the
Orkneys on 28 October. The UB-59 was
scuttled at Zeebrugge on 5 October
1918, and the U B - 8 9 sank after a colli-
sion with the German cruiser Fr a n k f u r t
on 21 October. The surviving boats were
surrendered at war’s end and scrapped in
1921–1922 (the UB-125 served brieﬂy as
the Japanese O-7), with the exception of
the U B - 9 9 , which became the Fr e n c h
C a r i s s a n and was not discarded until
1935.E A R LY SUBMARINES: GERMANY 113

G E R M A N Y: U - 1 5 1 CLASS (1917)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

U - 1 5 5 (28 March 1916), U - 1 5 1 (4 A p r i l
1917)
B u i l d e r : Flensburger
U-156 (17 April 1917)
B u i l d e r : Atlas
U - 1 5 2 (20 May 1917), U - 1 5 3 (19 June
1917), U-154 (10 September 1917)
B u i l d e r : Reihersteigwerft
U-157 (23 May 1917)
B u i l d e r : Stülken
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1512 tons (surfaced),
1875 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 213930 x 29920 x 17940
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Germania diesel engines,
supplemental diesel generator, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 800 bhp/800 shp =
12.5/5.25 knots
R a n g e : 25,000 nm at 5.5 knots surfaced,
65 nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 500mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 18 torpedoes, 2 x 150mm
guns, 2 x 88mm guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 56
N o t e s : Three boats of this class were
designed and laid down as merchant
submarines intended to break the British
blockade and establish a service between
Germany and the United States. The
Deutschland (later the U-155) made two
round-trip voyages to the United States
in 1916 that were both commercial and
propaganda successes. Its sister, the Bre-
m e n , was sunk on its maiden voyage to
the United States in October 1916, prob-
ably by a mine. The third boat, the Old-
enburg, was taken over by the navy before
completion, converted, and commis-
sioned as the U-151.
Five additional examples were ordered
as U-cruisers from the outset. A l t h o u g h
their origins endowed them with very
great range, they were too slow and too
weakly armed to operate effectively as
warships. The submarine E-35 torpedoed
the U - 1 5 4 in the Atlantic west of Cape
Saint Vincent on 11 May 1918, and the
U - 1 5 6 was mined in the Northern
Barrage on 25 September. The surviving
boats were surrendered at war’s end and
scrapped between 1921 and 1922.114 E A R LY SUBMARINES: GERMANY

U - 1 2 7 CLASS (1917)

U - 1 3 5 (8 September 1917), U - 1 3 6 (7 No-
vember 1917), U - 1 3 7 (8 January 1918),
U-138 (26 March 1918)
B u i l d e r : Danzig
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1175 tons (surfaced),
1534 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 2739110 x 24970 x 14900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 supple-
mental diesel generators, 2 electric mo-
tors, 2 shafts. 3500 bhp plus 900
shp/1690 shp = 17/8 knots
R a n g e : 10,000 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 50
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 500mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern), total 14 torpedoes, 2 x
150mm guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 46
N o t e s : The design for this class was the
first for a very long range submarine,
termed a U-cruiser. The larger size in-
creased bunkerage and range, and a
150mm deck gun was fitted for use
against merchant vessels to supplement
the torpedo armament. The supplemen-
tal diesel generators provided dash speed
on the surface. A total of twelve boats
were ordered, four each from Germania
(the U - 1 2 7–U - 1 3 0), A.G. Weser (the
U - 1 3 1–U - 1 3 4), and the Kaiserliche
Werft Danzig. Only the last four were
launched before the war’s end, the others
being scrapped on the building ways, to-
gether with the U - 1 3 7 and the U - 1 3 8 ,
which were not completed. The other
two boats were surrendered and scrapped
in 1921.

[ S W E D E N ] —H A J E N CLASS (1917)

Hajen (8 November 1917), Sälen (31 Janu-
ary 1918), Va l r o s s e n (16 April 1918),
Bävern (5 March 1921)
B u i l d e r : Kockums
I l l e r n (30 June 1921), U t t e r n (25 June
1921)
B u i l d e r : Karlskrona
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 422 (last three: 472) tons
(surfaced), 600 (last three: 650) tons
(submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 1 7 7920 (last three: 187900) x
17910 (last three: 19900) x 11960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 2000 bhp/700 shp =
15.5/9 knots
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 180 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 8 torpedoes, 1 x 75mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 30
N o t e s : A.G. Weser supplied Kockums with
the design for the ﬁrst group of this class.
It was a modiﬁcation of the UB-III design
that eliminated the stern tube and thus
shortened the boat. The same design was
very slightly enlarged to build the second
group. The Sälen was stricken on 24 July
1942, the Hajen and the Valrossen on 19
March 1943, and the Bävern and Uttern
on 6 October 1944 and scrapped. The
I l l e r n was sunk in a collision in Kalmar
Sound on 12 August 1943, salved, and
scrapped.E A R LY SUBMARINES: GERMANY 115

G E R M A N Y: U - 1 3 9 CLASS, U - 1 4 0 ( 1 9 1 7 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

U - 1 3 9 (3 December 1917), U - 1 4 0 (4 No-
vember 1917), U-141 (9 January 1918)
B u i l d e r : Germania
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1930 tons (surfaced),
2483 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 3019100 x 299100 x 17940
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, sup-
plemental diesel generator, 2 electric mo-
tors, 2 shafts. 3300 bhp plus 450
shp/1690 shp = 15.25/7.5 knots
R a n g e : 17,750 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 53
nm at 4.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 500mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern), total 19 torpedoes, 2 x
150mm guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 66
N o t e s : This Germania design for a U-
cruiser was the largest type of submarine
to enter service with the German Fleet
during World War I. The supplemental
diesel generator provided dash speed on
the surface. Twenty-seven larger versions
of this type were ordered, but none had
been completed before the end of the
war; all were scrapped in 1919–1920.
The very long range of these boats and
their fine performance, particularly on
the surface, was very inﬂuential on post-
war submarine design, especially in Japan
and the United States. All three boats
survived the war. The U - 1 2 9 went to
France and served as the Halbronn until
stricken in 1935; the U-140 went to the
United States and was sunk as a target in
1921; and the U-141 went to Britain and
was scrapped in 1923.116 E A R LY SUBMARINES: GERMANY

U - 1 1 7 CLASS (1917)

U-122 (9 December 1917), U-123 (26 Janu-
ary 1918), U - 1 2 4 (28 March 1918), U -
1 2 5 (26 May 1918), U - 1 2 6 (16 June
1918)
B u i l d e r : Blohm und Voss
U - 1 1 7 (10 December 1917), U - 1 1 8 ( 2 3
February 1918), U - 1 1 9 (4 April 1918),
U - 1 2 0 (20 June 1918), U - 1 2 1 (20 Sep-
tember 1918)
B u i l d e r : Hamburg
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1164 tons (surfaced),
1512 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 267940 x 24930 x 13980
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 2400 bhp/1200 shp =
14.75/7 knots
R a n g e : 9400 nm at 7 knots surfaced, 35
nm at 4.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 500mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern), total 12 torpedoes, 2 x
100cm stern mine tubes, total 42 mines,
1 x 88mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 40
N o t e s : This class was a greatly enlarged ver-
sion of the previous design for an ocean-
going minelayer with much more powerful
m a c h i n e r y, a heavier battery, reduced
mine load, and very long range. It retained
the single-hull form with large saddle bal-
last tanks and added an improved bow
form for better sea-keeping. All boats were
surrendered at war’s end and scrapped in
1921–1922 except the U - 1 1 9 , which be-
came the French René Au d r y and was re-
tained until 1937 (the U - 1 2 5 b r i e f l y
served as the Japanese O - 1) .

TYPE UC-III (1918)

U C - 9 0 (19 January 1918), U C - 9 1 (19 Janu-
ary 1918), U C - 9 2 (19 January 1918),
U C - 9 3 (19 February 1918), U C - 9 4 ( 1 9
February 1918), U C - 9 5 (19 Fe b r u a r y
1918), U C - 9 6 (17 March 1918), U C - 9 7
(17 March 1918), U C - 9 8 (17 March
1918), U C - 9 9 (17 March 1918), U C - 1 0 0
(14 April 1918), U C - 1 0 1 (14 April 1918),
U C - 1 0 2 (17 April 1918), U C - 1 0 3 ( 1 4
April 1918), U C - 1 0 4 (25 May 1918), U C -
1 0 5 (25 May 1918), U C - 1 0 6 (25 May
1918), U C - 1 0 7 (2 June 1918), U C - 1 0 8
(2 June 1918), U C - 1 0 9 (2 June 1918),
U C - 1 1 0 (6 July 1918), U C - 1 1 1 (6 July
1918), U C - 1 1 2 (6 July 1918), U C - 1 1 3 ( 6
July 1918), U C - 1 1 4 (11 August 1918),
U C - 1 1 5 (11 August 1918), U C - 1 1 6 ( 1 1
August 1918), U C - 1 1 7 (11 August 1918),
U C - 1 1 8 (11 August 1918), U C - 1 1 9 ( S e p-
tember 1918), U C - 1 2 0 ( S e p t e m b e r
1918), U C - 1 2 1 (September 1918), U C -
1 2 2 (1 October 1918), U C - 1 2 3 (1 Octo-
ber 1918), U C - 1 2 4 (1 October 1918)
B u i l d e r : Blohm und Voss
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 491 tons (surfaced), 471
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 2149100 x 18900 x 12960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 600 bhp/770 shp =
11.5/6.5 knots
R a n g e : 9850 nm at 7 knots surfaced, 40
nm at 4.5 knots submergedE A R LY SUBMARINES: ITA LY 117

A r m a m e n t : 3 x 500mm torpedo tubes (2
b o w, 1 stern), total 7 torpedoes, 6 x
100cm mine tubes, total 14 mines, 1 x
105mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 32
N o t e s : The design for the third group of
coastal minelayers was a modestly en-
larged development of the previous type.
The principal differences were an
improved bow section for better sea-
keeping, heavier pressure hull plating to
increase the diving depth, and a bigger
deck gun. An additional 88 boats were or-
dered, of which 34 were laid down and
scrapped incomplete in 1919 and the re-
mainder canceled at war’s end. All the
class survived the war and were surren-
dered. The U C - 9 0 and the U C - 9 9 c o m-
missioned in the Imperial Japanese Navy
as the O - 4 and the O - 5 and were
scrapped in 1921. The other boats were
broken up between 1919 and 1922.

N O T E : U - 1 1 5, U - 1 1 6, U - 1 4 2–U - 1 5 0, U - 1 5 8, U - 1 5 9, U - 1 7 3–U - 2 0 0, U B - 1 5 6–U B - 2 4 9, and
UC-125–UC-192 were broken up on the slip incomplete at the end of World War I or cancelled prior
to construction.

I TA LY
D E L F I N O ( 1 8 9 2 )

B u i l d e r : La Spezia
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 98 tons (surfaced), 108
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 80990 x 9950 x 5930
M a c h i n e r y : 1 electric motor, 1 shaft. 65
shp = 6/5 knots
R a n g e : 24 nm at 2 knots surfaced or sub-
merged
A r m a m e n t : 1 x 405mm torpedo tube (bow)
C o m p l e m e n t : 11
N o t e s : The D e l ﬁn o , designed by Giacinto
Pullino, was a single-hull type with main
ballast tanks amidships and trim tanks at
bow and stern. In addition to a pair of
planes forward there were two vertical
screws driven by the single electric motor
to assist in diving and maintaining depth.
Between 1902 and 1904 the Delﬁno was
reconstructed. A large forward deck cas-
ing and a substantial conning tower were
ﬁtted, a 130 bhp gasoline engine was in-
stalled for surface navigation, a fixed
periscope was added, and a 450mm tor-
pedo tube replaced the original unit. The
rebuilt D e l f i n o displaced 102 tons sur-
faced, 113 tons submerged, and had a
surface range of 165 nautical miles at 2
knots. After serving as a training vessel
during World War I, the D e l f i n o w a s
stricken on 16 January 1919.118 E A R LY SUBMARINES: ITA LY

G L A U C O CLASS (1905)

G l a u c o (9 June 1905), S q u a l o (10 June
1906), Narvalo (21 October 1906),
O t a r i a (25 March 1908), Tr i c h e c o ( 6
June 1909)
B u i l d e r : Venezia
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 161 tons (surfaced), 244
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 120990 x 14910 x 8980
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Fiat (O t a r i a and Tr i c h e c o :
Thornycroft) gasoline engines, 2 Sav-
igliano electric motors, 2 shafts. 600
bhp/170 shp = 14/6 knots
R a n g e : 900 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 40 nm
at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 (G l a u c o : 3) x 450mm tor-
pedo tubes (bow), total 4 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 15
N o t e s : Cesare Laurenti’s design for this
class established a pattern followed in the
construction of the majority of Italian sub-
marines until the end of World War I. It
featured a partial double hull containing
the midship main ballast tanks, with trim
tanks in the single-hull sections fore and
aft. The hull shape was optimized for sur-
face navigation with a broad, ﬂat stern, a
wide upper surface that served as a deck,
and a pronounced bow overhang project-
ing forward of the muzzles of the torpedo
tubes. Planes at bow and stern were em-
ployed for diving and depth control. These
boats were deployed for harbor defense at
Brindisi and Venice during World War I
and were stricken in early 1918.

F O C A CLASS (1908)

Fo c a (8 September 1908), [Sweden]—
Hvalen (16 February 1909)
B u i l d e r : Fiat
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 185 tons (surfaced), 280
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 139950 x 14900 x 5930
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Fiat gasoline engines, 2
Siemens electric motors, 2 shafts. 600
bhp/160 shp = 16/6 knots
R a n g e : 875 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 40 nm
at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 450mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 4 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 17
N o t e s : This class was an improved Laurenti
type with a larger conning tower. The
Fo c a originally had three engines (a total
of 800 bhp) and three shafts. It was scut-
tled at Naples after a gasoline explosion
on 26 April 1909, salved, and reﬁtted with
the center engine and shaft deleted. The
Fo c a served in the Adriatic during Wo r l d
War I and was stricken in November
1918. The H v a l e n caused a sensation at
the time by making the 4,000-mile voyage
from La Spezia to Stockholm under its
own power and without any escort. It was
stricken in 1919 and sunk as a target.E A R LY SUBMARINES: ITA LY 119

[ D E N M A R K ] —D Y K K E R E N (18 JUNE 1909)

B u i l d e r : Fiat
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 105 tons (surfaced), 130
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 1139100 x 109100 x 7930
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Fiat gasoline engines, 2
Siemens electric motors, 2 shafts. 400
bhp/210 shp = 12/7.5 knots
R a n g e : 100 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 40 nm
at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 180 torpedo tubes (bow)
C o m p l e m e n t : 9
N o t e s : This boat was a smaller version of
the previous Laurenti design. The Nor-
wegian steamer Ve s l e a c c i d e n t a l l y
rammed and sank it on 9 October 1916.

M E D U S A CLASS (1911)
Ve l e l l a (25 May 1911), M e d u s a (30 June A r m a m e n t : 2 x 450mm (Portuguese boat:
1911), A r g o (14 January 1912), Ja l e a ( 3 1 80) torpedo tubes (bow), total 4 torpe-
August 1912), [Po r t u g a l ] —E s p a d a r t e ( 5 does
October 1912) C o m p l e m e n t : 21
B u i l d e r : Fiat N o t e s : This class was a further develop-
Fi s a l i a (25 February 1912), Z o e a (2 March ment of the Laurenti type. The most
1913) important advance was the installation of
B u i l d e r : Orlando diesel engines. The boats were consid-
S a l p a (14 May 1912), Ja n t i n a (20 Novem- ered very stable and maneuverable while
ber 1912) submerged. The Italian boats served ex-
B u i l d e r : Muggiano tensively in the Adriatic. The German
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 248 tons (surfaced), 305 U B - 1 5 torpedoed the Medusa in the
tons (submerged) northern Adriatic on 10 June 1915, and
D i m e n s i o n s : 147980 x 13990 x 9960 the Jalea was mined in the Gulf of Trieste
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Fiat (Ve l e l l a : MAN) diesel on 17 August. The surviving boats were
engines, 2 Savigliano (Ve l e l l a : S i e m e n s ) stricken in 1918. The Portuguese E s-
electric motors, 2 shafts. 650 bhp/300 padarte served operationally until 1931.
shp = 12/8 knots
R a n g e : 1200 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 54
nm at 6 knots submerged120 E A R LY SUBMARINES: ITA LY

[UNITED STAT E S ] —T H R E S H E R (15 AUGUST 1912)

B u i l d e r : Cramp
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 360 tons (surfaced), 470
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 157960 x 17960 x 109110
M a c h i n e r y : 2 gasoline engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 1000 bhp/440 shp =
14/9.5 knots
R a n g e : 2500 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 70
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 180 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 4 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 24
N o t e s : The design for this boat was essen-
tially an enlarged version of Laurenti’s
Fo c a with a heavier torpedo battery and
more extensive conning tower. Its focus
on superior operational qualities on the
surface was a marked contrast with con-
temporary U.S. submarines of the Hol-
land type that emphasized submerged
performance. The Thresher was renamed
the G - 4 before it was launched. It oper-
ated from New London during World Wa r
I and was stricken on 5 September 1919.

N A U T I L U S CLASS (1913)

Nautilus (25 April 1913), Nereide (12 June
1913)
B u i l d e r : Venezia
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 225 tons (surfaced), 320
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 134940 x 14910 x 9940
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Sulzer diesel engines, 2
Ansaldo electric motors, 2 shafts. 600
bhp/320 shp = 13.25/8 knots
R a n g e : 1000 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 64
nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 450mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 4 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 19
N o t e s : Curio Bernadis was responsible for
this single-hull design with a large mid-
ship main ballast tank and fore and aft
diving tanks. It was unusual in using only
forward diving planes. The boats served
in the Adriatic during World War I. The
Austrian submarine U - 5 torpedoed the
Nereide near Pelagosa Island on 5 August
1915, and the N a u t i l u s was stricken in
1919.

P U L L I N O CLASS (1913)

Giacinto Pullino (21 June 1913), G a l i l e o
Ferraris (9 November 1913)
B u i l d e r : La Spezia
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 345 tons (surfaced), 405
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 138950 x 13950 x 12940
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Fiat diesel engines, 2 Sav-
igliano electric motors, 2 shafts. 1460
bhp/520 shp = 14/9 knots
R a n g e : 1690 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 170
nm at 2.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 450mm torpedo tubes (2
bow, 2 stern), 2 x 450mm torpedoes (ex-
ternal racks), total 8 torpedoes, 1 x
57mm gun, 1 x 37mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 21
N o t e s : Virginio Cavallini designed these
double-hull submarines. They were the
ﬁrst Italian boats to carry deck guns and
also had the heaviest torpedo armament
of the ﬂeet’s prewar submarines. The Gi-
acinto Pullino ran aground on Galioli Is-
land on 31 July 1917, was captured by
Austrian forces, and sank while under
tow to Pola. The Galileo Fe r r a r i s w a s
stricken in 1919.E A R LY SUBMARINES: ITA LY 121

F CLASS (1913)

[ B r a z i l ] —F - 1 (11 June 1913), F - 3 (9 No-
vember 1913), F - 5 (1913), [Italy]—F - 1
(2 April 1916), F-2 (4 June 1916), F-3 (6
June 1916), F - 5 (12 August 1916), F - 7
(23 December 1916), F-8 (13 November
1916), F - 9 24 September 1916), F - 1 0
(19 October 1916), F-11 (17 September
1916), F - 1 2 (30 November 1916), F - 1 9
(10 March 1918), F - 2 0 (17 March
1918), F-21 (19 May 1918), [Portugal]—
Fo c a (18 April 1917), G o l f i n h o ( 1 9 1 7 ) ,
Hidra (9 August 1917), [Spain]—Narciso
Monturiol (1917), Cosme Garcia (1917),
A 3 (1917)
B u i l d e r : Fiat
F-4 (12 August 1916), F-6 (4 March 1917),
F - 1 3 (20 May 1917), F - 1 5 (27 May
1917), F-17 (3 June 1917)
B u i l d e r : Orlando
F - 1 4 (23 January 1917), F - 1 6 (19 March
1917), F-18 (15 May 1917)
B u i l d e r : Odero
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 262 tons (surfaced), 319
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 149970 x 13990 x 10920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Fiat diesel engines, 2 Sav-
igliano electric motors, 2 shafts. 670
bhp/500 shp = 12.5/8.25 knots
R a n g e : 1300 nm at 9 knots surfaced, 120
nm at 2.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 450mm (Brazilian, Po r-
tuguese and Spanish boats: 180) torpedo
tubes (bow), total 4 torpedoes, 1 x 30 AA
(Italian boats)
C o m p l e m e n t : 26
N o t e s : These boats, designed by Laurenti,
were improved versions of the earlier
M e d u s a with upgraded equipment, en-
larged conning towers, and arrangements
to dive faster. The Italian boats also had
two periscopes and a deck gun. The type
originally was developed for export to
Brazil but was put into production for the
Italian Fleet when Italy entered Wo r l d
War I.
The Italian Fleet considered these
craft its best coastal submarines of World
War I, and all survived the war. The F-2,
the F - 4 , the F - 8 , and the F - 1 1 w e r e
stricken in 1919; the F - 1 4 was rammed
accidentally by the destroyer G i u s e p p e
M i s s o r i off Pola on 6 August 1928 and
sunk; and the other boats were stricken
between 1929 and 1935.
The export boats also had very long
service lives. The Brazilian boats were
stricken in 1933, the Portuguese sub-
marines in 1934–1935, and the Spanish
examples in 1936.122 E A R LY SUBMARINES: ITA LY

A R G O N A U TA CLASS (1914)

Argonauta (5 June 1914), [Russia]—Svyatoy
Giorgiy (1916)
B u i l d e r : Fiat
[ S w e d e n ] —S v ä r d f i s k e n (30 August 1914),
Tumlaren (14 October 1914)
B u i l d e r : Kockums
[United Kingdom]—S - 1 (15 September
1915), S-2 (20 September 1915), S-3 (26
September 1915)
B u i l d e r : Scott
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 255 tons (surfaced), 306
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 148900 x 13990 x 99100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 700 (Swedish boats:
1000) bhp/450 shp = 13.5 (Swedish
boats: 14.25)/8 knots
R a n g e : 1600 nm at 9 knots surfaced, 120
nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 450mm (British boats: 180)
torpedo tubes (bow), total 4 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 24
N o t e s : Laurenti designed this class for
export. The A r g o n a u t a was ordered by
Russia as the Svyatoy Giorgiy but was
taken over when Italy entered World
War I. The Swedish boats had more pow-
erful engines and carried a 37mm deck
gun. The first two British boats served
brieﬂy with the Royal Navy but were sold
to Italy along with the S-3, still complet-
ing, on 1 November 1915. The S v y a t o y
Giorgiy was ordered to replace the origi-
nal boat and differed in carrying a 75mm
deck gun.
The Italian boats served in the A d r i-
atic. The formerly British submarines
were stricken in 1919, but the Argonauta
remained in service until 1928. The
Swedish boats received 57mm guns in
place of their 37mm weapons in the
1920s and were stricken in 1936. The
Svyatoy Giorgiy joined the Arctic Fleet in
September 1917, was taken over by the
Bolsheviks and renamed the Kommunar,
and was stricken in July 1924.E A R LY SUBMARINES: ITA LY 123

B A L I L L A CLASS (1915)

Balilla (4 August 1915), Pa c i n o t t i ( 1 3
March 1916), G u g l i e l m o t t i (4 June
1916)
B u i l d e r : Fiat
[Japan]—No. 18 (28 June 1919), No. 21 (22
November 1919), No. 31 (10 March
1921), No. 32 (22 June 1921), No. 33
(17 September 1921)
B u i l d e r : Nagasaki
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 728 tons (surfaced), 875
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 213930 x 19980 x 13950
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 2600 bhp/900 shp =
14/9 knots
R a n g e : 3500 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 75
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 5 (Balilla: 4) x 450mm (Japa-
nese boats: 180) torpedo tubes (2/3 bow,
2 stern), total 6/8 torpedoes, 2 x 30 guns
(Italian boats)
C o m p l e m e n t : 38
N o t e s : Germany ordered a large subma-
rine from Fiat in 1913 as the U-42, built
to a single-hull design (with a prominent
raised bow casing) developed by the ﬁrm
from earlier Laurenti types. It was incom-
plete when Italy entered World War I and
was taken over as the Balilla. Its two very
similar sister ships carried an extra bow
torpedo tube and reverted to a ﬂush deck.
The Japanese boats used a design very
similar to that of the Pacinotti. They were
designated the F1 and the F2 classes,
and were the Imperial Japanese Navy’s
ﬁrst long-range submarines.
The Austro-Hungarian torpedo boats
Tb.65F and Tb.66F sank the Balilla near
Lissa on 14 July 1916; the British sloop
C y c l a m e n mistakenly attacked and sank
the Guglielmotti off Capraia on 10
March 1917; the Pa c i n o t t i was stricken
in 1921. The Japanese boats were redes-
ignated the RO-1 through RO-5 in 1924
and stricken 1930–1932.

X-2 CLASS (1917)

X-2 (25 April 1917), X-3 (29 December
1917)
B u i l d e r : Ansaldo
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 403 tons (surfaced), 468
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 139990 x 18910 x 10920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Sulzer diesel engines, 2
Ansaldo electric motors, 2 shafts. 650
bhp/325 shp = 8.25/6.25 knots
R a n g e : 1200 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 70
nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 9 x mine tubes, total 18 mines,
1 x 30 AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 23
N o t e s : Bernadis undertook the reconstruc-
tion as the Italian X - 1 of the German
coastal minelayer U C - 1 2 after its recov-
e r y. He adopted the German minelaying
system using inclined tubes when he
came to design his own coastal minelay-
ers. The design used a single-hull with
saddle main ballast tanks and minelaying
tubes in the after section of the hull.
These submarines operated brieﬂy during
World War I but saw very little postwar
service, though they were not discarded
until September 1940.124 E A R LY SUBMARINES: ITA LY

M I C C A CLASS (1917)

Pietro Micca (3 June 1917), Luigi Galvani
(26 January 1918), Torricelli (16 June
1918), Lorenzo Marcello (29 September
1918), Angelo Emo (23 February 1919),
Lazzaro Mocenigo (26 June 1919)
B u i l d e r : La Spezia
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 842 tons (surfaced), 1244
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 2079630 x 20940 x 14900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 2600 bhp/1300 shp =
11/11 knots
R a n g e : 2100 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 180
nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 450mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern), total 8 torpedoes, 2 x 30
guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 40
N o t e s : The design for these large double-
hull submarines was completed before
World War I by the Comitato Progetti
Navi (Ship Projects Committee) in con-
junction with Cavallini. As designed they
were to carry a twin rotating torpedo tube
mount on deck in addition to the internal
tubes. Three boats, the Lorenzo Marcello,
the Angelo Emo, and the L a z z a r o
M o c e n i g o , were ordered from the Regia
Arsenale Venezia in 1914, but construc-
tion was halted in 1915, the hulls dis-
mantled, and they were reordered from
La Spezia. None of the class were com-
pleted until after World War I. Their
machinery was unreliable and their ma-
neuverability poor, so they were partially
reconstructed beginning in 1923 with
larger deck casings and conning towers.
The Lorenzo Marcello was stricken in
1928, the Pietro Micca, the Angelo Emo,
and the Torricelli in 1930, and the other
two boats between 1937 and 1938.

N CLASS (1917)

N - 1 (6 September 1917), N - 2 (26 January
1918), N-3 (27 April 1918), N-4 (6 Octo-
ber 1918)
B u i l d e r : Ansaldo
N-5 (18 November 1917), N-6 (20 Septem-
ber 1918)
B u i l d e r : Tosi
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 277 tons (surfaced), 363
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 150960 x 14900 x 10920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 700 bhp/400 shp =
12.5/7.5 knots
R a n g e : 1300 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 45
nm at 2 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 450mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 4 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 23
N o t e s : Bernardis updated his Nautilus de-
sign for this class with improved machin-
ery and a deck gun, and continued his
preference for bow diving planes only.
Their construction was prolonged by ma-
terial shortages during World War I. They
were active postwar until stricken be-
tween 1929 and 1935.E A R LY SUBMARINES: JAPA N 125

B A R B E R I G O CLASS (1917)

Agostino Barbarigo (18 November 1917),
Andrea Provana (27 January 1918), S e-
bastiano Veniero (7 June 1918), Giacomo
Nani (8 September 1918)
B u i l d e r : Fiat
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 762 tons (surfaced), 924
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 2199100 x 19940 x 12960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Fiat diesel engines, 2
Ansaldo electric motors, 2 shafts. 2600
bhp/1400 shp = 16/9.75 knots
R a n g e : 2070 nm at 11 knots surfaced, 100
nm at 4.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 450mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern), total 8 torpedoes, 2 x 30
guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 40
N o t e s : Laurenti and Cavallini jointly de-
signed these large, partially double hull
submarines. This class introduced a full-
length deck (from the after end of the
torpedo compartment to the stern) above
the batteries, which were contained in
four separate watertight compartments.
These boats were both fast and maneu-
verable, and they were very popular with
their operators. The steamer C a p e n a
sank the Sebastiano Veniero in a collision
off Cape Passero on 6 August 1925; the
Agostino Barbarigo and the A n d r e a
Provana were stricken in 1928; the Gia-
como Nani was stricken in 1935.

J A PA N
TYPES K1 (1917), K2 (1919), K3 (1920), AND K4 (1921)

No. 19 (15 October 1917), No. 20 (1 De-
cember 1917), No. 22 (31 March 1919),
No. 23 (26 August 1919), No. 24 (14 Oc-
tober 1920), No. 34 (24 February 1921),
No. 35 (25 March 1921), No. 36 (28 De-
cember 1920), No. 37 (22 April 1920)
B u i l d e r : Kure
No. 38 (26 October 1920), No. 39 (26 Octo-
ber 1920), No. 40 (15 October 1921),
No. 41 (25 October 1921), No. 58 ( 2 2
June 1922)
B u i l d e r : Yokosuka
No. 42 (8 December 1919), No. 43 (17 Feb-
ruary 1920), No. 45 (18 October 1921),
No. 62 (13 April 1922)
B u i l d e r : Sasebo
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 735–770 tons (surfaced),
1030–1080 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 2 2 7900 ( Type K2 and K3:
2 3 0900, Type K4: 243900) x 2091 00 x
1 2900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Sulzer diesel engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 2600 bhp/1200
shp = 18/9 knots
R a n g e : 4000–6000 nm at 10 knots sur-
faced, 85 nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 180 ( N o s .4 5 , 5 8 , 6 2 : 2 10)
torpedo tubes (bow), 2 x 180 (Nos. 4 5 ,
58, 62: 210) torpedoes (external cradles),
total 10 torpedoes, 1 x 30 AA gun.
C o m p l e m e n t : 45
N o t e s : Japanese naval constructors derived
the design for these boats, built in four
series, from earlier Schneider- L a u b e u f
submarines for the ﬂeet. They conformed
well to Japanese requirements for long
range and heavy ﬁrepower. The last group
introduced 21-inch torpedoes into
Japan’s submarine force.
These boats were redesignated the
R O - 1 1 through the R O - 2 8 in 1924. A l l
except the R O - 1 7 through the R O - 1 9
and the RO-26 through the RO-28 were
stricken in 1931–1932. The R O - 1 7
through the R O - 1 9 were stricken in
1936, and the last three boats were dis-
carded in 1940.126 E A R LY SUBMARINES: RUSSIA

R U S S I A
D E L F I N ( 1 9 0 3 )

B u i l d e r : Baltic
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 113 tons (surfaced), 124
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 64930 x 11900 x 9960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 gasoline engines, 1 electric
motor, 1 shaft. 300 bhp/120 shp = 9/4.5
knots
R a n g e : 243 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 285
nm at 2.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 450mm torpedoes
(Drzewiecki drop collars)
C o m p l e m e n t : 22
N o t e s : Designed by Ivan Grigorevich Bub-
n o v, Mikhail Nikolaevich Beklemishev,
and Igor Stanislavovich Goryunov, who
together formed the Imperial Russian
N a v y ’s Construction Commission for
Submarines. The Delﬁn had a single hull
with saddle tanks located toward the
stern (a Bubnov characteristic). The hull
was sheathed with teak planking to pre-
vent damage should it ground while div-
ing. It sank on trials in June 1904 but
was raised, refitted, and transferred to
Vladivostok for service in the war with
Japan. In February 1916 the D e l f i n
moved to the Arctic, but it was stricken in
August 1917.

K A S AT K A CLASS (1904)

Kasatka, Makrel, Nalin, Okun, Skat, Fe l d-
marshal Graf Sheremetev
B u i l d e r : Baltic
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 140 tons (surfaced), 177
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 116960 x 11900 x 11930
M a c h i n e r y : 1 kerosene engine, 1 electric
m o t o r, 1 shaft. 200 bhp/100 shp =
8.5/5.5 knots
R a n g e : 700 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 50 nm
at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 450mm torpedoes
(Drzewiecki drop collars)
C o m p l e m e n t : 24
N o t e s : These boats were enlarged versions
of the D e l f i n . Larger conning towers
were fitted to all boats after the Russo-
Japanese Wa r, and the M a k r e l and the
Okun received 120-horsepower diesel en-
gines in 1906. All but the Makrel and the
O k u n (deployed in the Baltic) initially
served in the Far East. The N a l i m a n d
the S k a t transferred to the Black Sea in
1914, decommissioned in May 1917, and
were scuttled at Sevastopol on 26 A p r i l
1919. The K a s a t k a and the Fe l d m a r s h a l
Graf Sheremetev went to the Arctic in
1915 and to the Baltic in 1917. The
Kasatka, the Makrel, and the Okun trans-
ferred to the Caspian in 1918, were de-
commissioned on 21 November 1925,
and scrapped. The Feldmarshal Graf
S h e r e m e t e v was renamed the K e t a on
4 August 1917, sank accidentally at Pet-
rograd in 1922, and was salved and
scrapped in 1924.E A R LY SUBMARINES: RUSSIA 127

P O C H T O V Y ( 1 9 0 8 )

B u i l d e r : Metal Works
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 134 tons (surfaced), 146
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 118910 x 10960 x 89100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 gasoline engines, 1 diesel-
electric generator, 1 shaft. 260 bhp/130
shp = 11.5/6.5 knots
R a n g e : 350 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 28
nm at 2.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 450mm torpedoes
(Drzewiecki drop collars),
C o m p l e m e n t : 22
N o t e s : Stefan K. Drzewiecki designed this
submarine, which originally was to use a
single diesel-electric generator. An inter-
nal oxygen supply made possible opera-
tion of the gasoline engines while the
boat was submerged, the exhaust gases
being expelled by a compressor through a
perforated pipe below the keel. This sys-
tem functioned reliably but caused heavy
internal condensation from steam gener-
ated by submerged engine operation,
while the exhaust left a very visible wake
of bubbles. Drzewiecki also experimented
brieﬂy with using a liquid oxygen closed-
cycle system. The Pochtovy served in the
Baltic and was stricken in 1913.

M I N O G A (11 OCTOBER 1908)

B u i l d e r : Baltic
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 117 tons (surfaced), 142
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 105970 x 9920 x 8930
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Nobel diesel engines, 1
Volta electric motor, 1 shaft. 240
bhp/140 shp = 11/5 knots
R a n g e : 600 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 70
nm at 3.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 450mm torpedo tubes
(bow), 1 x 37mm AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 22
N o t e s : This Bubnov-designed boat was the
first Russian submarine fitted with
diesels. It also introduced a variable-
pitch propeller. The Minoga served in the
Baltic, was transferred to the Caspian in
November 1918, and was stricken on 21
November 1925 and scrapped.

A K U L A (22 AUGUST 1909)

B u i l d e r : Baltic
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 370 tons (surfaced), 475
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 184900 x 12900 x 11900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Nobel diesel engines, 1
electric motor, 3 shafts. 900 bhp/300 shp
= 10.5/6.5 knots
R a n g e : 1900 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 38
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 450mm torpedo tubes (2
b o w, 2 stern), 4 x 450mm torpedoes
(Drzewiecki drop collars), total 8 torpe-
does, 4 mines, 1 x 47mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 24
N o t e s : Bubnov also designed this boat, in
which the diesel engines and the electric
motor drove separate shafts were each
ﬁtted with variable-pitch propellers. After
some initial mechanical problems it
proved very successful. The Akula served
in the Baltic and was mined and sunk off
Windau on 28 November 1915.128 E A R LY SUBMARINES: RUSSIA

K R A B (19 AUGUST 1912)

B u i l d e r : Nikolayev
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 560 tons (surfaced), 740
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 173930 x 14930 x 12990
M a c h i n e r y : 4 Curtiss gasoline engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 1200 bhp/400
shp = 11.75/7 knots
R a n g e : 1700 nm at 8.5 knots surfaced, 82
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 450mm torpedo tubes
(bow), 2 x 450mm torpedoes (Drzewiecki
drop collars), total 4 torpedoes, 60
mines, 1 x 75mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 50
N o t e s : The world’s ﬁrst minelaying subma-
rine was designed by Mikhail N. Naletov.
It had a single hull with saddle tanks.
The mines were carried in two longitudi-
nal tubes within the hull casing, along
which they were transported by an elec-
trically driven chain conveyor and
launched through stern doors. The Krab
served very actively in the Black Sea on
minelaying operations during World War
I. It was seized by German forces in May
1918, surrendered to the British in No-
vember, and scuttled at Sevastopol on 26
April 1919.

M O R Z H CLASS (1913)

Morzh (28 September 1913), Nerpa (19 Oc-
tober 1913), Tyulen (19 October 1913)
B u i l d e r : Baltic Yard
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 630 tons (surfaced), 760
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 220900 x 15900 x 13900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 500 bhp/800 shp =
10.75/8.5 knots
R a n g e : 2500 nm at 7 knots surfaced, 120
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 450mm torpedo tubes (2
b o w, 2 stern), 8 x 450mm torpedoes
(Drzewiecki drop collars), total 12 torpe-
does, 1 x 75mm gun, 1 x 37mm (Tyulen:
47mm) AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 47
N o t e s : Bubnov designed this class as a de-
velopment of the Akula design. Originally
they were to use two 1140 bhp Krupp
diesel engines, but the outbreak of war
halted delivery. They operated in the
Black Sea, where the M o r z h was lost in
May 1917, probably on a mine. The
Ty u l e n was seized by German forces in
May 1918, surrendered to the British in
November, and scuttled at Sevastopol on
26 April 1919. The Nerpa was taken over
by the Soviet Navy and recommissioned
on 3 June 1922 as the Po l i t b u k . It was
redesignated No. 11 in 1923, decom-
missioned on 30 December 1930, and
scrapped.E A R LY SUBMARINES: RUSSIA 129

B A R S CLASS (1915)

Bars (2 June 1915), Gepard (2 June 1915),
Ve p r (August 1915), Vo l k (1915), E d i-
norog (1916), Zmeya (1916)
B u i l d e r : Baltic
Tigr (18 September 1915), Lvitsa (23 Octo-
ber 1915), Pantera (26 April 1916), Forel
(1916), K u g u a r (1916), L e o p a r d ( 1 9 1 6 ) ,
R y s (1916), Tu r (1916), U g o r ( 1 9 1 6 ) ,
Yaguar (1916), Ersh (1917), Yaz (1917)
B u i l d e r : Nobel and Lessner
B u r e v e s t n i k (7 October 1916), O r l a n
(1916), Lebed (September 1917), Pelikan
(September 1917)
B u i l d e r : Nikolayev
Gagara (24 September 1916), Utka (1916)
B u i l d e r : Baltic Yard
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 650 tons (surfaced), 786
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 223900 x 15900 x 13900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 2640 bhp/900 shp =
18/10 knots
R a n g e : 400 nm at 17 knots surfaced, 25
nm at 9 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 450mm torpedo tubes (2
b o w, 2 stern), 8 x 450mm torpedoes
(Drzewiecki drop collars), total 12 torpe-
does, 1 x 57mm gun, 1 x 37mm AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 33
N o t e s : Bubnov designed this class as en-
larged and improved versions of the ear-
lier M o r z h class. Most received much
lower powered diesel engines from Vick-
ers or NLSECO because the designed
Nobel engines were not available. Arma-
ment also varied. The Ersh and the Forel
were armed with only two 450mm tubes
in the bow, carried only four torpedoes,
and were fitted with two minelaying
tubes with forty-two mines, similar to the
arrangements aboard the Krab. The Bars,
the Ve p r, and the Vo l k had two 63mm
guns; the G a g a r a , the Pa n t e r a , the R y s ,
the Ti gr, and the U t k a had two 75mm
guns and deleted the antiaircraft weapon,
while the Burevestnik and the Orlan had
one 75mm gun in place of the 57mm
weapon. All the class probably used
variable-pitch propellers, and the Kuguar
was ﬁtted with a telescoping tube to sup-
ply air to operate the diesels while sub-
merged, a forerunner of the snorkel.
The Black Sea boats saw only limited
service. The L e b e d and the Pe l i k a n s t i l l
were incomplete when the British scut-
tled them at Odessa in February 1920.
The others were seized by German forces
in May 1918, surrendered to the British
in November, and scuttled at Sevastopol
on 26 April 1919.
The Baltic boats saw considerably
more use. The B a r s was sunk by German
warships off Norrkoping on 28 May
1917. The L v i t s a was lost on 11 June
1917, and the G e p a r d was sunk on 28
October 1917 near Luzerort—both,
most probably, by mines. The E d i n o r o g
sank while under tow in the Gulf of Fin-
land on 25 February 1918. Three boats
still incomplete after the end of Wo r l d
War I (the Fo r e l , the U g o r, and the Ya z)
were scrapped by the Soviets. The Ve p r
was used as a Soviet stationary training
vessel and scrapped in 1925. The others
were taken over by the Soviet Navy and
designated No. 1 (Ti g r), No. 2 (Vo l k) ,
No. 3 (Tu r), No. 4 (L e o p a r d), No. 5 (Pa n-
t e r a), No. 6 (Z m e y a), No. 7 ( R y s), No. 8
(Ya g u a r), No. 9 (E r s h), and No. 10
(K u g u a r). They were renamed the
K o m m u n a r, the B a t r a k , the To v a r i t s c h ,
the K r a s n o a r m e y e t s , the K o m i s s a r, t h e130 E A R LY SUBMARINES: SPA I N

P r o l e t a r i y, the B o l s h e v i k , the K r a s n o ﬂo t e t s ,
the R a b o c h i y, and the B e d n y a k on 17 Jan-
uary 1923. The B e d n y a k was stricken on
4 October, 1926, and the R a b o c h i y w a s
lost in an accident on 22 May 1931 in the
Gulf of Finland. The surviving boats be-
came the B - 1 , the B - 5 , the B - 8 , the B - 7 ,
the B - 2 , the B - 6 , the B - 3 , and the B - 4
respectively. All were taken out of service
between 1934 and 1936.

S PA I N
P E R A L (8 SEPTEMBER 1888)

B u i l d e r : Carraca
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 77 tons (surfaced), 85
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 70900 x 8960 x 8900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 electric motors, 2 shafts. 60
shp = 7.75/3 knots
R a n g e : 396 nm at 3 knots surfaced
A r m a m e n t : 1 x 356mm torpedo tube
(bow), total 3 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 10
N o t e s : Teniente de Navio Isaac Peral y Ca-
ballero, at that time a professor at the
Academia de Ampliacion de la A r m a d a ,
designed his submarine in 1887. It used
ballast tanks and vertical screws for div-
ing and depth control and carried two
Schwarzkopf spar torpedoes, in addition
to the weapon in its single tube. Although
extensive trials proved successful, the
boat saw little service and was discarded
in 1909.

S W E D E N
H A J E N (16 JUNE 1904)

B u i l d e r : Stockholm
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 107 tons (surfaced), 127
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 709100 x 119100 x 99100
M a c h i n e r y : 1 Avance parafﬁn oil engine, 1
Luth and Rosén electric motor, 1 shaft.
200 bhp/70 shp = 9.5/7 knots
A r m a m e n t : 1 x 450mm torpedo tube
(bow), total 3 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 11
N o t e s : The Swedish Navy sent Carl Rich-
son to the United States in 1900 to study
submarine design and construction. On
his return he began designing a boat for
the navy. Its design owed much to con-
temporary Holland single-hull types. In
1916 a 135-bhp diesel engine replaced
the paraffin oil engine, and the casing
was substantially enlarged. The H a j e n
was stricken in 1922 and is preserved as
a museum exhibit.E A R LY SUBMARINES: SWEDEN 131

U N D E R VATTENSBÅTEN NO. 2 CLASS (1909)

Undervattensbåten No. 2 (25 Fe b r u a r y
1909), Undervattensbåten No. 3 (14 April
1909), Undervattensbåten No. 4 (16 Oc-
tober 1909)
B u i l d e r : Motala
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 138 tons (surfaced), 230
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 87980 x 119100 x 99100
M a c h i n e r y : 1 Polar diesel engine, 1 Luth
and Rosén electric motor, 1 shaft. 420
bhp/200 shp = 8.75/6.5 knots
A r m a m e n t : 1 x 450mm torpedo tube
(bow), total 3 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 12
N o t e s : Richson designed this class as an
enlarged version of the earlier H a j e n
single-hull type. From the outset these
boats featured substantial casings and
large bridge superstructures. They served
in the Swedish archipelago until they
were stricken between June 1929 and
November 1930.

D E L F I N E N ( 1 9 1 4 )

B u i l d e r : Bergsunds
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 260 tons (surfaced), 370
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 139950 x 14910 x ?
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Hesselman diesel engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 1000 bhp/300
shp = 13.5/9.5 knots
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 450mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 4 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 21
N o t e s : Richson developed this much larger
single-hull boat from his earlier designs
to create a submarine suitable for use be-
yond coastal waters. It again featured a
large casing and bridge structure. The
Delﬁnen was stricken on 1 October 1930.

L A X E N CLASS (1914)

Laxen (1914), Gädden (1915)
B u i l d e r : Karlskrona
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 140 tons (surfaced), 170
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 879110 x 119100 x ?
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 700 bhp/200 shp =
8.75/6.5 knots
A r m a m e n t : 1 x 450mm torpedo tube
(bow), 3 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 10
N o t e s : These boats were a further develop-
ment of Richson’s coastal design for the
Undervattensbåten No. 2 class, with im-
proved machinery and superstructure.
The G ä d d e n was stricken in 1931 and
the Laxen in 1935.132 E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED KINGDOM

A B B O R E N CLASS (1916)

A b b o r e n (25 May 1916), B r a x e n (5 May
1916)
B u i l d e r : Karlskrona
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 174 tons (surfaced), 310
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 101980 x 119100 x 10920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 920 bhp/280 shp =
9.5/7.5 knots
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 450mm torpedo tubes
(bow), 4 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 14
N o t e s : This class was the final develop-
ment of Richson’s coastal submarine de-
sign. It was enlarged to accommodate
two bow torpedo tubes and more power-
ful machinery. Both boats were stricken
on 18 June 1937.

UNITED KINGDOM
[ G R E E C E ] —N O R D E N F E LT I ( 1 8 8 5 )

B u i l d e r : Ekensberg
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 60 tons (surfaced); sub-
merged characteristics unknown
D i m e n s i o n s : 64900 x 9900 x 7900
M a c h i n e r y : 1 Lamm compound steam en-
gine, 1 cylindrical return tube boiler, 1
shaft. 100 ihp = 9/4 knots
R a n g e : 100 nm at 5 knots surfaced, 14 nm
at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 1 x 140 torpedo tube (bow), 1 x
25mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 3
N o t e s : The Reverend George Garrett
developed the basic design for this sub-
marine from his earlier R e s u r g a m a n d
completed the detail design jointly with
Torsten Nordenfelt, the Swedish indus-
trialist. The boat used ballast tanks, hori-
zontal planes fore and aft, and vertical
screws for diving and depth control. The
steam plant, built by Bolinders
Mekaniska Verkstad, propelled the sub-
marine both on the surface and when
submerged. The boiler furnace was shut
down before diving, and steam was stored
in special pressurized tanks at the bow
and stern to power the engine while the
boat was under water.
The submarine ran extensive trials in
September 1885 with the Swedish Navy.
Consistent depth control proved a prob-
lem, as did very high internal tempera-
tures while the boat was submerged.
Nevertheless, the trials were viewed as
quite successful, and Nordenfelt sold the
boat to the Greek government in 1886.
The Greek Fleet rarely used its subma-
rine, and was broken up in 1901.E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED KINGDOM 133

[ T U R K E Y ] —N O R D E N F E LT II CLASS, ABDUL HAMID ( 1 8 8 6 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Abdul Hamid (6 September 1886), A b d u l
Medjid (4 August 1887),
B u i l d e r : Barrow
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 100 tons (surfaced), 160
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 100900 x 12900 x 10900
M a c h i n e r y : 1 Lamm compound steam en-
gine, 1 cylindrical return tube boiler, 1
shaft. 250 ihp = 8/4 knots
R a n g e : 100 nm at 5 knots surfaced, 14 nm
at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 140 torpedo tube (bow), 2 x
25mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 7
N o t e s : These boats were enlarged versions
of the earlier Garrett and Nordenfelt de-
sign with an additional vertical screw on
either beam to improve depth control and
longitudinal stability. They were ordered
by the Turkish government to counter the
Nordenfelt boat deployed by Greece.
Trials again were regarded as successful,
although the boats still demonstrated
longitudinal instability. Two boats were
delivered to Turkey but saw virtually no
service. They remained in storage until
after World War I.

[ R U S S I A ] —N O R D E N F E LT III CLASS (1887)

Nordenfelt (26 March 1887)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 160 tons (surfaced), 243
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 119990 x 12900 x 10900
M a c h i n e r y : 1 Plenty and Scott compound
steam engine, 1 cylindrical return tube
boiler, 1 shaft. 1000 ihp = 14/5 knots
R a n g e : 1000 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 14
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 140 torpedo tube (bow), to-
tal 4 torpedoes, 2 x 25mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 9
N o t e s : This was the ﬁnal development of
the Garrett and Nordenfelt design, sold
to Russia. It ran aground off Jutland on
18 September 1888 while in transit to
Russia and became a total loss.134 E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED KINGDOM

UNITED KINGDOM: A CLASS (1902), A - 1 3 ( 1 9 0 5 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

A-1 (9 June 1902), A-3 (9 March 1903), A-2
(16 April 1903), A-4 (9 June 1903), A-5
(2 March 1904), A-6 (3 March 1904), A-
7 (23 January 1905), A - 8 (23 January
1905), A - 9 (8 February 1905), A - 1 0 ( 8
February 1905), A-11 (8 March 1905), A-
12 (8 March 1905), A-13 (18 April 1905)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 190 tons (surfaced), 205
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 105900 x 12990 x 10980
M a c h i n e r y : 1 Wolseley gasoline (A - 1 3
Hornsby-Ackroyd heavy oil) engine, 1
electric motor, 1 shaft. 450–600
bhp/125–150 shp = 11/7 knots
R a n g e : 320 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 60
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : A - 1 – A - 4 : 1 x 180 torpedo tube
(bow), total 3 torpedoes, A - 5 – A - 1 3 : 2 x
1 80 torpedo tubes (bow), total 4 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 11
N o t e s : Vickers enlarged the design of the
original Holland type, adding a full con-
ning tower. These boats were largely
experimental, with each successive unit
incorporating improvements. They were
used intensively for training throughout
their careers. The A - 1 was rammed and
sunk by the liner Berwick Castle off the
Nab on 18 March 1904, and the A-3 was
rammed and sunk by the depot ship Haz-
a r d off the Isle of Wight on 2 Fe b r u a r y
1912. Both were raised and expended as
targets. In 1905 the A-5 and the A-8 sank
after internal explosions, and the A - 4
sank during sound experiments as a
result of ﬂooding; all were raised and re-
turned to service. An accident sank the
A - 7 in Whitesands Bay on 16 January
1914. All the surviving boats were sold
for scrap in 1920.E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED KINGDOM 135

UNITED KINGDOM: B CLASS (1904), B - 4 ( 1 9 0 5 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

B - 1 (25 October 1904), B - 2 (30 October
1905), B - 3 (31 October 1905), B - 4 ( 1 4
November 1905), B - 5 (14 November
1905), B-6 (30 November 1905), B-7 (30
November 1905), B-8 (23 January 1906),
B-9 (24 January 1906), B-11 (21 Febru-
ary 1906), B-10 (23 March 1906)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 287 tons (surfaced), 316
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 142930 x 13970 x 11970
M a c h i n e r y : 1 Vickers gasoline engine, 1
electric motor, 1 shaft. 600 bhp/290 shp
= 12/6 knots
R a n g e : 1000 nm at 8.75 knots surfaced, 60
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 180 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 4 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 15
N o t e s : The design for this class was an en-
largement of the previous group, with a
more extensive casing and planes on the
conning tower to improve depth control.
They saw extensive service in home wa-
ters and the Mediterranean (the B - 1 1
penetrating the Dardanelles and sinking
the Turkish coast defense ship Messudieh
on 13 December 1914). The B-6 through
the B-11 were converted to surface patrol
vessels at Venice in 1917. The B - 2 w a s
rammed and sunk by the liner A m e r i k a
off Dover on 4 October 1912, and the B-
1 0 was bombed and sunk by A u s t r o -
Hungarian aircraft at Venice on 5 August
1916. The other vessels in the class were
sold for scrap in 1920.136 E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED KINGDOM

UNITED KINGDOM: C CLASS (1906), C - 2 2 ( 1 9 0 8 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

C-1 (10 June 1906), C-2 (10 June 1906), C-
5 (20 August 1906), C - 6 (20 A u g u s t
1906), C - 3 (3 October 1906), C - 4 ( 1 8
October 1906), C-7 (15 February 1907),
C - 8 (15 February 1907), C - 9 (3 A p r i l
1907), C - 1 0 (15 April 1907), C - 1 1 ( 2 7
May 1907), C - 1 2 (9 September 1907),
C - 1 3 (9 November 1907), C - 1 4 (7 De-
cember 1907), C - 1 5 (21 January 1908),
C - 1 6 (19 March 1908), C - 2 1 (26 Sep-
tember 1908), C-22 (10 October 1908),
C-23 (26 November 1908), C-24 (26 No-
vember 1908), C - 2 5 (10 March 1909),
C - 2 6 (20 March 1909), C - 2 7 (22 A p r i l
1909), C - 2 8 (22 April 1909), C - 2 9 ( 1 9
June 1909), C-30 (19 June 1909), C-31
(2 September 1909), C - 3 2 (29 Septem-
ber 1909), C-35 (2 November 1909), C-
36 (30 November 1909), C-37 (1 January
1910), C - 3 8 (10 December 1910),
[Japan]—No. 8 (19 May 1908), No. 9 (19
May 1908)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
C - 1 7 (13 August 1908), C - 1 8 (10 October
1908), C-19 (20 March 1909), C-20 (27
November 1909), C - 3 3 (10 May 1910),
C-34 (8 June 1910)
B u i l d e r : Chatham
[ J a p a n ] —No. 10 (4 March 1911), No. 11
(18 March 1911), No. 12 (27 March
1911), No. 16 (15 March 1916), No. 17
(15 March 1916)
B u i l d e r : Kure
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 287 tons (surfaced), 316
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 142930 x 13970 x 11960
M a c h i n e r y : 1 Vickers gasoline (Japanese
boats: Vickers diesel) engine, 1 electric
motor, 1 shaft. 600 bhp/290 shp = 13/7.5
knots
R a n g e : 1000 nm at 8.75 knots surfaced,
60 nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 180 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 4 torpedoesE A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED KINGDOM 137

C o m p l e m e n t : 16
N o t e s : This class was a mass-production
version of the previous group, though the
conning tower diving planes were omit-
ted. The Japanese boats introduced diesel
engines for improved safety.
The British boats saw very extensive
service in home waters and the Mediter-
ranean, including working as antisubma-
rine ships in cooperation with surface
escorts that led to the destruction of three
U-boats. Four boats (the C - 2 6 , the C - 2 7 ,
the C - 3 2 , and the C - 3 5) went to the Baltic
in 1916. The C - 3 2 was blown up by its
crew in the Gulf of Riga after suffering
heavy damage from German forces on 22
O c t o b e r, 1917, and the other boats were
scuttled off Helsingfors on 4 April 1918.
The C - 1 1 was rammed and sunk by
the steamer Eddystone off Cromer on 14
July 1909. The C-12, the C-14, the C-16,
and the C-17 all sank after collisions but
were raised and returned to service. The
C - 2 9 , the C - 3 1 , and the C - 3 3 were lost
in the North Sea in 1915, probably to
mines. The U-boat U - 5 2 torpedoed and
sank the C - 3 4 off the Shetland Isles on
17 July 1917. The C-3 was expended as
an explosive charge during the raid on
Zeebrugge on 23 April 1918. The surviv-
ing boats of the class were sold for scrap
in 1920.
The Japanese boats were used primar-
ily for training and were stricken on 1
December 1928.

UNITED KINGDOM: D CLASS (1908), D - 1 ( 1 9 0 8 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

D - 1 (16 May 1908), D - 2 (25 May 1910), D - 3
(17 October 1910), D - 4 (27 May 1911),
D - 5 (28 August 1911), D - 6 (23 October
1 9 1 1 )
B u i l d e r : Barrow
D-7 (14 January 1911), D-8 (23 September
1911)
B u i l d e r : Chatham
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 495 tons (surfaced), 620
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 164970 x 20950 x 11950
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 1200 bhp/550 shp =
14/9 knots
R a n g e : 2500 nm at 10 knots surfaced;
submerged characteristics unknown
A r m a m e n t : 3 x 180 torpedo tubes (2 bow, 1
stern), total 6 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 25138 E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED KINGDOM

N o t e s : The design for this class established
the basic features of British submarine
design until after World War II. It in-
cluded the adoption of saddle ballast
tanks, bow planes in addition to the stern
units, a substantial casing and conning
t o w e r, relatively long range, diesel en-
gines, and, in the case of the D-4, the in-
stallation of a deck gun. The D - 5 w a s
mined off Yarmouth on 3 November
1914; the D - 2 was sunk by German
antisubmarine craft off Borkum on 25
November 1914; the D-3 was bombed in
error and sunk by the French airship
AT- 0 off Féchamp on 12 March 1918;
and the D-6 was torpedoed and sunk by
the German UB-73 off the Irish coast on
28 June 1918. The surviving members of
the class were sold for scrap 1921.

UNITED KINGDOM: E CLASS (1912)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

GROUP I
E-4 (5 February 1912), E-5 (17 May 1912),
E-3 (29 October 1912), E-6 (12 Novem-
ber 1912), [Australia]—A E - 2 (22 May
1913), AE-1 (18 June 1913)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
E-1 (9 November 1912), E-2 (23 November
1912), E - 7 (2 October 1913), E - 8 ( 3 0
October 1913)
B u i l d e r : Chatham
GROUP II
E-9 (29 November 1913), E-10 (29 Novem-
ber 1913), E - 1 1 (23 April 1914), E - 1 5
(23 April 1914), E-14 (7 June 1914), E-
16 (23 September 1914), E-17 (16 Janu-
ary 1915), E - 1 8 (4 March 1915), E - 1 9
(13 May 1915), E-20 (12 June 1915), E-
2 1 (24 June 1915), E - 2 2 (27 A u g u s t
1915), E-23 (28 September 1915),
B u i l d e r : Barrow
E - 1 2 (5 September 1914), E - 1 3 (22 Sep-
tember 1914)
B u i l d e r : Chatham
E-29 (1 June 1915), E-30 (29 June 1915)
B u i l d e r : Armstrong
E-25 (23 August 1915), E-26 (11 November
1915), E-53 (1916), E-54 (1916)
B u i l d e r : Beardmore
E-31 (23 August 1915)
B u i l d e r : Scott
E - 3 7 (2 September 1915), E - 4 7 (29 May
1916), E-38 (13 June 1916), E-48 (2 Au-
gust 1916)
B u i l d e r : Fairﬁeld
E-42 (22 October 1915)
B u i l d e r : Cammell Laird
E-43 (11 November 1915), E-44 (21 Febru-
ary 1916), E-49 (18 September 1916)
B u i l d e r : Swan HunterE A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED KINGDOM 139

E - 5 5 (5 February 1916), E - 5 6 (19 June
1916), E-52 (25 January 1917)
B u i l d e r : Denny
E-33 (18 April 1916)
B u i l d e r : Thornycroft
E - 3 5 (20 May 1916), E - 3 6 (16 September
1916), E-50 (13 November 1916)
B u i l d e r : John Brown
E - 3 9 (18 May 1916), E - 4 0 (9 November
1916)
B u i l d e r : Palmer
E-32 (16 August 1916)
B u i l d e r : White
E-27 (9 June 1917)
B u i l d e r : Yarrow
GROUP II MINELAYERS
E-41 (22 October 1915), E-45 (25 January
1916), E-46 (4 April 1916)
B u i l d e r : Cammell Laird
E-24 (9 December 1915)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
E-51 (30 November 1916)
B u i l d e r : Scott
E-34 (27 January 1917)
B u i l d e r : Thornycroft
D i s p l a c e m e n t : Group I: 655 tons (sur-
faced), 796 tons (submerged), Group II:
667 tons (surfaced), 807 tons (sub-
merged)
D i m e n s i o n s : Group I: 178910 x 22990 x
12970, Group II: 182960 x 22990 x 12970
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 1600 bhp/840 shp =
15/9 knots
R a n g e : 3000 nm at 10 knots surfaced;
submerged characteristics unknown
A r m a m e n t : Group I: 4 x 180 torpedo tubes
(1 bow, 2 beam, 1 stern), total 8 torpedoes,
1 x 12-pounder gun, Group II: 5 x 180
torpedo tubes (2 bow, 2 beam, 1 stern),
total 10 torpedoes, 1 x 12-pounder gun;
minelayers: 3 x 180 torpedo tubes (2 bow,
1 stern), total 3 torpedoes, 10 x mine
tubes (20 mines)
C o m p l e m e n t : 30
N o t e s : The E class design incorporated im-
provements from experience with the
previous class and was continually up-
dated during production. They saw exten-
sive service in the North Sea and
Mediterranean, forming the core of the
British submarine force. They also oper-
ated successfully in the Sea of Marmara,
the Adriatic, and the Baltic.
The E-7, the E-14, the E-15, and the
E - 2 0 were lost in the Sea of Marmara.
The E-3, the E-5, the E-6, the E-10, the
E - 1 6 , the E - 2 2 , the E - 2 4 , the E - 2 6 ,
the E-30, the E-34, the E-37, the E-47,
the E - 4 9 , and the E - 5 0 were lost in the
North Sea to mines, or German antisub-
marine forces or submarines. The E - 1 8
was lost in the Baltic on 24 May 1916 af-
ter attacking a German destroyer, and the
E-1, the E-8, the E-9, and the E-19 were
blown up at Helsingfors on 3 April 1918
to avoid capture. Three boats, the E-13,
the E - 1 7 , and the E - 3 6 , were lost
through accidental collisions during
World War I. The surviving boats of the
class were sold for scrap in 1921–1922.
The Australian A E - 1 was lost (cause
unknown) off New Britain on 14 Septem-
ber 1914, and the A E - 2 was scuttled in
the Sea of Marmara after action with
Turkish torpedo boats on 30 April 1915.140 E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED KINGDOM

UNITED KINGDOM: V CLASS (1914), V- 3 ( 1 9 1 5 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

V-1 (23 June 1914), V-3 (1 April 1915), V-4
(25 November 1915), V- 2 (17 Fe b r u a r y
1917)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 391 tons (surfaced), 457
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 147960 x 16930 x 11960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 900 bhp/450 shp =
14/8.5 knots
R a n g e : 3000 nm at 9 knots surfaced;
submerged characteristics unknown
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 180 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 4 torpedoes, 1 x 12-pounder gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 20
N o t e s : Vickers designed this class in re-
sponse to an Admiralty request for a new
coastal submarine. They had a partial
double hull and rather small batteries
that limited their underwater endurance.
All served in the North Sea and were sold
for scrap in 1920.E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED KINGDOM 141

UNITED KINGDOM: N A U T I L U S (31 DECEMBER 1914)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

B u i l d e r : Barrow
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1441 tons (surfaced),
2026 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 258950 x 26900 x 17990
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 3700 bhp/1000 shp =
17/10 knots
R a n g e : 5300 nm at 11 knots surfaced;
submerged characteristics unknown
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 180 torpedo tubes (2 bow, 4
beam, 2 stern), total 16 torpedoes, 1 x 30
AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 42
N o t e s : This boat, designed by Vickers, was
intended for long-range, high-speed op-
eration. It served largely as an experi-
mental platform for future development
of large, fast submarines. The N a u t i l u s
was scrapped in 1922.142 E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED KINGDOM

UNITED KINGDOM: F CLASS (1915), F - 2 ( 1 9 1 6 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

F-1 (31 March 1915)
B u i l d e r : Chatham
F-2 (7 June 1917)
B u i l d e r : White
F-3 (19 February 1916)
B u i l d e r : Thornycroft
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 363 tons (surfaced), 525
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 151900 x 16910 x 10970
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 900 bhp/400 shp =
14/8.5 knots
R a n g e : 3000 nm at 9.5 knots surfaced;
submerged characteristics unknown
A r m a m e n t : 3 x 180 torpedo tubes (2 bow, 1
stern), total 6 torpedoes, 1 x 2-pounder
gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 19
N o t e s : This class was built to an Admiralty
design for a coastal submarine and fea-
tured a partial double hull. These boats
served in the North Sea and were sold for
scrap in 1920.E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED KINGDOM 143

UNITED KINGDOM: G CLASS (1915), G - 1 3 ( 1 9 1 6 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

G - 1 (14 August 1915), G - 2 (23 December
1915), G - 3 (22 January 1916), G - 4 ( 2 3
October 1915), G-5 (23 November 1915)
B u i l d e r : Chatham
G - 6 (7 December 1915), G - 7 (4 March
1916)
B u i l d e r : Armstrong
G-8 (1 May 1916), G-9 (15 June 1916), G-
10 (11 January 1916), G-11 (22 February
1916), G-12 (24 March 1916), G-13 (18
June 1916)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
G-14 (17 May 1917)
B u i l d e r : Scott
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 703 tons (surfaced), 837
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 187910 x 22980 x 13940
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 1600 bhp/840 shp =
14.5/9 knots
R a n g e : 2400 nm at 12.5 knots surfaced;
submerged characteristics unknown
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 180 torpedo tubes (2 bow, 2
beam), 1 x 210 torpedo tube (stern), total
10 torpedoes, 1 x 30 AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 30
N o t e s : This Admiralty design for an over-
seas boat featured a partial double hull
and introduced 21-inch torpedoes into
submarine service. They served in the
North Sea. The G - 9 was rammed and
sunk accidentally by the destroyer Paisley
on 16 September 1917; the G-7 and the
G-8 were lost in the North Sea, probably
to mines; the G - 1 1 was wrecked near
Harwich on 22 November 1918. The
class’s surviving boats were sold for scrap
in 1921–1922.144 E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED KINGDOM

UNITED KINGDOM: J CLASS (1915)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

J - 1 (6 November 1915), J - 2 (6 November
1915
B u i l d e r : Portsmouth DY
J - 3 (4 December 1915), J - 4 (2 Fe b r u a r y
1916)
B u i l d e r : Pembroke
J - 5 (9 September 1915), J - 6 (9 September
1915), [Australia]—J - 7 (21 Fe b r u a r y
1917)
B u i l d e r : Devonport
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1204 tons (surfaced),
1820 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 275960 x 23900 x 14900
M a c h i n e r y : 3 Vickers diesel engines, 3
electric motors, 3 shafts. 3600 bhp/1350
shp = 19.5/9.5 knots
R a n g e : 5000 nm at 12.5 knots surfaced;
submerged characteristics unknown
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 180 torpedo tubes (4 bow, 2
beam), total 12 torpedoes, 1 x 12-
pounder gun, 1 x 30 AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 44
N o t e s : Vickers developed this class of ﬂeet
submarines with three shafts to allow use
of standard, more reliable diesel engines
to attain the speciﬁed speed. To improve
the lines for speed, the design used a par-
tial double hull. During World War I they
served in the North Sea. The J - 6 w a s
sunk in error off Blyth by the Q-ship
C y m r i c on 15 October 1918. The re-
maining British boats were transferred to
Australia in 1919. All the Australia boats
were sold for scrap between 1924 and
1929.E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED KINGDOM 145

UNITED KINGDOM: S W O R D F I S H (18 MARCH 1916)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

B u i l d e r : Scott
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 932 tons (surfaced), 1105
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 231930 x 229110 x 149110
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Parsons geared turbines, 1
Yarrow boiler, 2 electric motors, 2 shafts.
4000 shp/1400 shp = 18/10 knots
R a n g e : 3000 nm at 8.5 knots surfaced;
submerged characteristics unknown
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow), 4
x 180 torpedo tubes (beam), total 10 tor-
pedoes, 2 x 12-pounder guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 18
N o t e s : Scott developed the S w o r d f i s h d e-
sign from a Laurenti proposal for a
steam-powered fleet submarine to meet
Admiralty requirements. It featured a
partial double hull over three-quarters of
its length and a hull form very similar to
that of contemporary large Italian boats.
The Swordﬁsh was used for experimental
work until January 1917, then converted
into a surface patrol boat. It was sold for
scrap in 1922.146 E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED KINGDOM

UNITED KINGDOM: K CLASS (1913), K - 1 0 ( 1 9 1 6 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

K-1 (14 November 1916), K-2 (14 October
1916), K-5 (16 December 1916)
B u i l d e r : Portsmouth DY
K-3 (20 May 1916), K-4 (15 June 1916), K-
8 (10 October 1916), K - 9 (8 November
1916), K - 1 0 (27 December 1916), K - 1 7
(10 April 1917), K-26 (26 August 1919)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
K-6 (31 May 1916), K-7 (31 May 1916)
B u i l d e r : Devonport
K-11 (16 August 1916), K-12 (23 February
1917)
B u i l d e r : Armstrong
K-13 (11 November 1916), K-14 (8 Febru-
ary 1917)
B u i l d e r : Fairﬁeld
K-15 (31 October 1917)
B u i l d e r : Scott
K-16 (5 November 1917)
B u i l d e r : Beardmore
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1980 (K - 2 6 : 2140) tons
(surfaced), 2566 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 330900 (K-26: 351900) x 26970
(K-26: 28900) x 17900 (K-26: 16900)
M a c h i n e r y : 2 geared turbines, 2 Ya r r o w
boilers, 4 electric motors, 2 shafts.
10,500 shp/1440 shp = 24/9.5 knots
R a n g e : 3000 nm at 13.5 knots surfaced;
submerged characteristics unknown
A r m a m e n t : 10 x 180 torpedo tubes (4 bow,
4 beam, 1 twin revolving mount in super-
structure), total 18 torpedoes, 2 x 40
guns, 1 x 30 AA gun. K - 2 6 : 6 x 210 t o r-
pedo tubes (bow), 4 x 180 torpedo tubes
(beam), total 20 torpedoes, 3 x 40 guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 59
N o t e s : This class was the ﬁnal wartime at-
tempt to develop a fast fleet submarine.
The Admiralty design featured a powerful
steam plant, a complete upper hull above
the main pressure hull, and a fully en-
closed bridge. Wartime experience demon-
strated the need for additional buoyancy
forward, leading to the addition of a very
prominent bulbous upper bow. Even
though these submarines proved capable
of meeting the speed and maneuverability
requirements of the design, operating
them with the battlefleet was extremely
h a z a r d o u s .
The K-26 was the only unit completed
from the Improved K-class, which was
created to correct the original design’s de-
fects. It featured a much improved upper
hull shape that conferred good sea-
keeping qualities on the surface, enlarged
and heightened superstructure to better
protect stacks and other openings, and
redistributed ballast tanks arranged to en-
hance the rate of diving.
The K-13 sank on trials, was reﬂoated,
and returned to service as the K - 2 2 .
Three boats (the K - 1 , the K - 4 , and the
K-17) were lost during World War I as a
result of collisions, and the K - 5 sank in
the Atlantic on 20 January 1921, proba-
bly after exceeding its safe dive depth.
The surviving boats were sold for scrap
between 1921 and 1926, except for the
K-26, which survived until March 1931.E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED KINGDOM 147

UNITED KINGDOM: L CLASS (1917), L - 2 3 ( 1 9 1 9 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

GROUP I
L-7 (24 April 1917), L-8 (7 June 1917)
B u i l d e r : Cammell Laird
L - 1 (10 May 1917), L - 2 (6 June 1917),
L-3 (1 September 1917), L-4 (17 Novem-
ber 1917)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
L-6 (14 January 1918)
B u i l d e r : Beardmore
L-5 (26 January 1918)
B u i l d e r : Swan Hunter
[Japan]—No. 25 (10 October 1919), No. 26
(9 March 1920), No. 27 (6 June 1920),
No. 28 (13 October 1920), No. 29 ( 1 0
February 1921), No. 30 (11 May 1921)
B u i l d e r : Mitsubishi
GROUP II
L-15 (16 January 1918), L-16 (9 April 1918)
B u i l d e r : Fairﬁeld
L - 9 (29 January 1918), L - 1 0 (24 January
1918)
B u i l d e r : Denny
L - 1 8 (21 November 1918), L - 1 9 (4 Fe b r u-
ary 1919), L-20 (23 September 1918), L-
21 (11 October 1919), L-22 (25 October
1919), L-23 (1 June 1919), L-24 (19 Feb-
ruary 1919), L - 2 6 (29 May 1919), L - 2 7
(14 June 1919)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
L-33 (29 May 1919)
B u i l d e r : Swan Hunter
GROUP II MINELAYERS
L - 1 1 (26 February 1918), L - 1 2 (16 March
1918), L - 1 4 (10 June 1918), L - 1 7 ( 1 3
May 1918), L-25 (13 February 1919)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
GROUP III
L - 5 5 (21 September 1918), L - 5 6 (29 May
1919)
B u i l d e r : Fairﬁeld
L-52 (18 December 1918), L-53 (12 August
1919), [Yu g o s l a v i a ] —H r a b r i , N e b o j s a
(1927)
B u i l d e r : Armstrong
L-71 (17 May 1919)
B u i l d e r : Scott
L-54 (20 August 1919)
B u i l d e r : Denny
GROUP IV
[ J a p a n ] —No. 46 (3 December 1921), N o .
4 7 (2 March 1922), No. 57 (28 June
1922)
B u i l d e r : Mitsubishi
GROUP V
[ J a p a n ] —No. 59 (22 December 1922), N o .
72 (19 May 1923), No. 73 (19 September
1923), No. 84 (24 January 1924), RO-64
(19 August 1924), RO-68 (23 Fe b r u a r y
1925), RO-65 (25 September 1925),
RO-67 (18 March 1926), RO-66 (25 Oc-
tober 1926)
B u i l d e r : Mitsubishi148 E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED KINGDOM

D i s p l a c e m e n t : Groups I and II: 890 tons
(surfaced), 1080 tons (submerged),
Group III: 960 tons (surfaced), 1150
tons (submerged), Group IV: 897 tons
(surfaced), 1195 tons (submerged),
Group V: 996 tons (surfaced), 1322 tons
(submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : Group I: 231910 x 23960 x
1 3930, Group II: 238970 x 23960 x 13930,
Group III: 235900 x 23960 1 3 . 20, Group
I V: 250900 x 23960 x 13930, Group V:
250900 x 24930 x 12940
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 2400 bhp/1600 shp =
17/10.5 knots
R a n g e : 3800 (Group IV: 7000, Group V:
5500) nm at 10 knots surfaced, 80 nm at
4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : Group I: 6 x 180 torpedo tubes
(4 bow, 2 beam), total 10 torpedoes, 1 x
40 gun, (final 4 Japanese boats omitted
beam tubes), Group II: 4 x 210 t o r p e d o
tubes (bow), 2 x 180 torpedo tubes
(beam), total 10 torpedoes, 1 x 40 g u n ,
Group III: 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 12 torpedoes, 2 x 40 guns, Group IV:
4 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow), total 8 tor-
pedoes, 1 x 40 gun, Group V: 6 x 210 tor-
pedo tubes (bow), total 10 torpedoes, 1 x
30 AA gun, 1 x 7.62mm machine gun;
minelayers: 4 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 4 torpedoes, 16 x mine tubes and
mines
C o m p l e m e n t : Group I: 35, Group II: 38,
Group III: 44, Group IV: 48, Group V: 60
N o t e s : This design was developed as a re-
placement for the successful E -class. It
reverted to the single-hull type with sad-
dle ballast tanks that had proven itself
with the earlier boats. Later series made
the transition to 21-inch torpedo tubes.
L-13 was not used in a superstitious reac-
tion to the disasterous career of the K-13.
The L - 1 0 was sunk by German war-
ships north of Terschelling on 3 October
1918; the L-55 was sunk by Soviet war-
ships off Kronstadt on 4 June 1919 (and
was later recovered by the Soviets, com-
missioned in October 1931 as the
Bezbozhnik, damaged and laid up in May
1941, and scrapped about 1953); the L-9
sank in a typhoon at Hong Kong on 18
January 1923; the L-24 was accidentally
rammed and sunk by the battleship Reso-
l u t i o n on 10 January 1924. The other
boats, after serving actively into the
1930s, were sold for scrap between 1930
and 1936, apart from the L-23, the L-26,
and the L-27, which were used for train-
ing during World War II and were not
scrapped until 1946.
The Japanese boats were redesignated
the RO-51 through the R O - 6 3 in 1924.
The R O - 5 5 was stricken in 1939. The
RO-62 collided with the RO-66 off Wake
Island and sank it on 17 December 1941;
the R O - 6 0 wrecked at Kwajalein on 29
December; the U.S. destroyer Reid sank
the RO-61 off Atka Island on 31 August
1942; U.S. aircraft sank the R O - 6 5 i n
Kiska Harbor on 4 November. The other
Group IV boats served as training vessels
from 1941 and were joined by the re-
maining Group V boats from late 1942.
The RO-64 was mined in Hiroshima Bay
on 12 April 1945, and the other boats
were scrapped in 1946.
The H r a b r i was seized by the Italians
in April 1941 but was broken up later that
y e a r. The N e b o j s a escaped to A l e x a n d r i a
in April 1941 and operated with British
forces. After World War II, the N e b o s j a r e-
turned to the Yugoslav Navy and was re-
named the Ta r a . It was stricken in 1954.E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED KINGDOM 149

UNITED KINGDOM: M CLASS (1917), M - 2 ( 1 9 1 8 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

M-1 (9 June 1917), M-2 (19 October 1918)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
M - 3 (19 October 1918), M - 4 (20 June
1919)
B u i l d e r : Armstrong
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1594 tons (surfaced),
1946 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 295990 x 24980 x 159110
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Vickers diesel engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 2400 bhp/1600
shp = 15/9 knots
R a n g e : 3840 nm at 10 knots surfaced;
submerged characteristics unknown
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 180 (M - 3 : 2 10) torpedo
tubes (bow), total 8 torpedoes, 1 x 120
gun150 E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED KINGDOM

C o m p l e m e n t : 65
N o t e s : These boats were designed as sub-
marine monitors for antiship operations
with a secondary shore-bombardment
role. Trials with the M - 1 were very suc-
cessful, but the boats9 mission was
obsolete by that time and the M - 4 w a s
canceled before completion. The M - 3
was converted to a minelayer in 1927,
and the M - 2 was converted in 1928 to
carry a seaplane in a hangar. The M - 1
served briefly during World War I; the
class operated primarily on trials mis-
sions thereafter. The M - 1 was acciden-
tally rammed and sunk by the Swedish
collier Vi d a r in the English Channel on
12 November 1925; the M-2 sank in an
accident when the hangar door was in-
completely sealed while operating off
Portland on 26 January 1932; the M - 3
was sold for scrap in February 1932.

R CLASS (1918)

R-1 (24 April 1918), R-2 (25 April 1918), R-
3 (8 June 1918), R-4 (8 June 1918)
B u i l d e r : Chatham
R-7 (14 May 1918), R-8 (28 June 1918)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
R - 9 (12 August 1918), R - 1 0 (5 October
1918)
B u i l d e r : Armstrong
R-11 (16 March 1918), R-12 (9 April 1918)
B u i l d e r : Cammell Laird
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 410 tons (surfaced), 503
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 153990 x 15930 x 11960
M a c h i n e r y : 1 diesel engine, 1 electric mo-
tor, 1 shaft. 240 bhp/1200 shp = 9.5/15
knots
R a n g e : 2000 nm at 8 knots surfaced;
submerged characteristics unknown
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 180 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 12 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 22
N o t e s : The Admiralty designed this class as
fast boats that could overtake and sink
enemy submarines. The hull cross-section
duplicated that of the H class (see page
162): the hull form was similar, and the
whole external form was streamlined for
superior underwater performance. Ma-
chinery was half an H-class installation.
The bow compartment contained five
powerful, sensitive hydrophones with
suitable direction-finding equipment to
locate and target submarines underwater.
These boats met all expectations, but the
end of World War I seemed to terminate
their mission; they were discarded in Fe b-
ruary 1923.

N O T E : E - 2 8, K - 1 8–K - 2 1, K - 2 3–K - 2 5, L - 2 8–L - 3 2, L - 3 4–L - 5 1, L - 5 7–L - 7 0, L - 7 2–L -74, R-5, and R-6
all were cancelled at the end of World War I.E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S 151

UNITED STAT E S
H O L L A N D (17 MAY 1897)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

B u i l d e r : Crescent
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 64 tons (surfaced), 74
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 539100 x 10920 x 8960
M a c h i n e r y : 1 Otto gasoline engine, 1
Electro Dynamic electric motor, 1 shaft.
45 bhp/50 shp = 8/5 knots
A r m a m e n t : 1 x 180 torpedo tube (bow), to-
tal 3 torpedoes, 1 x 80 dynamite gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 7
N o t e s : The Holland was built as a private
venture, the sixth of John P. Holland’s
submarines. The single hull contained a
large ballast tank amidships, with small
trim tanks fore and aft. As constructed it
carried a dynamite gun fore and aft, and
the rudders and diving planes were for-
ward of the propeller.
Prior to its purchase for the U.S. Navy
on 18 April 1900, the Holland was modi-
fied. The rudders and dive planes were
moved abaft the propeller, and the after
dynamite gun was removed.
The Holland served as a training vessel
at the Naval Academy at Annapolis until
17 July 1905 (apart from a few months at
the Naval Torpedo Station at Newport in
1901) and subsequently at Norfolk. It
was stricken on 21 November 1910.152 E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S

UNITED STATES: A CLASS (1901), P O R P O I S E AND S H A R K ( 1 9 0 1 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

F u l t o n (12 June 1901), A d d e r (22 June
1901), Moccasin (28 August 1901), Por-
p o i s e (23 September 1901), S h a r k ( 1 9
October 1901), P l u n g e r (1 Fe b r u a r y
1902)
B u i l d e r : Crescent
[United Kingdom]—No. 1 (20 October
1901), No. 2 (21 February 1902), No. 3
(9 May 1902), No. 4 (23 May 1902), No.
5 (10 June 1902)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
Grampus (31 June 1902), Pike (14 January
1903)
B u i l d e r : Union Iron Works
[Russia]—Shchuka (15 October 1904), Bel-
uga (1905), Losos (1905), Peskar (1905),
Sterlyad (1905), Sudak (1907)
B u i l d e r : Nevskiy
[Japan]—No. 1 (20 March 1905), No. 2 (2
May 1905), No. 5 (13 May 1905), No. 3
(16 May 1905), No. 4 (27 May 1905)
B u i l d e r : Fore River
[The Netherlands]—O-1 (8 June 1905)
B u i l d e r : De Schelde
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 107 tons (surfaced), 123
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 64900 x 119100 x 10960
M a c h i n e r y : 1 gasoline engine, 1 electric
m o t o r, 1 shaft. 160 bhp/160 shp = 8/7
knots
R a n g e : 184 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 21 nm
at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 1 x 180 (Russian boats: 150)
torpedo tube (bow), total 5 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 7
N o t e s : H o l l a n d ’s seventh design was an
enlarged version of his previous design.
The prototype (the Fulton) later was sold
to Russia and renamed the Som. T h e r e
was greater internal space resulting from
an increase in the single hull diameter
and the elimination of the dynamite gun.
The main ballast tank was concentrated
amidships to enhance maneuverability,E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S 153

and a compensating tank was fitted to
permit easy trim adjustment to suit dif-
ferent water salinity levels.
All of these boats were at least semiex-
perimental and acquired additional su-
perstructure to enhance navigation on
the surface, periscopes for submerged vi-
sion, and other enhancements. The Rus-
sian boats received diesel engines by
1910 (the Sudak was diesel-engined from
the outset), and those serving in the
Baltic added 47mm deck guns early in
1916. The Japanese boats received longi-
tudinal bronze stiffening plates and bilge
keels to increase their diving depth. The
O-1 received a 200-bhp MAN diesel en-
gine in 1914.
All the U.S. boats, except the Plunger,
operated with the Asiatic Fleet after ser-
vice in home waters. The Plunger w a s
stricken on 24 February 1913 and the
others on 16 January 1922.
The British boats operated from
Portsmouth on training missions. They
were removed from the Effective List in
August 1912.
The Som and the Shschuka w e r e
transported to Vladivostok by rail and
were operational during the Russo-
Japanese War. They remained in the Pa-
cific until early 1915, when they trans-
ferred to the Black Sea and, later that
same year, to the Baltic. The Losos a n d
the Sudak went to the Black Sea in 1907
and were scuttled by the British on 26
April 1919 at Sevastopol. The Som c o l-
lided with the Swedish steamer A n g e r-
manland off the Åland Islands on 23 May
1916 and sank. The remaining Baltic
boats were scuttled at Reval on 25 Febru-
ary 1918.
The Japanese boats operated as train-
ing vessels. The No. 4 sank at Kure on 14
November 1916 as a result of a gasoline
explosion but was raised and returned to
service. All boats were stricken in 1921.
The O-1 conducted training missions
until stricken in 1920.

[ R U S S I A ] —P R O T E C T O R (1 NOVEMBER 1902)

B u i l d e r : Lake
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 136 tons (surfaced), 174
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 65900 x 11900 x 12930
M a c h i n e r y : 2 gasoline engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 250 bhp/100 shp = 12/7
knots
R a n g e : 250 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 30 nm
at 7 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 3 x 150 torpedo tubes (2 bow,
1 stern), total 3 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 8
N o t e s : Simon Lake built the Protector as a
private venture. He entered it in the Im-
perial Russian Navy’s international com-
petition at Libau in 1904, leading to its
purchase as Osetr. The Osetr served with
the Baltic Fleet until stricken in 1913.154 E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S

[ R U S S I A ] —OSETR CLASS (1904)

Kefal, Bychek, Paltus, Plotva, Sig (1905)
B u i l d e r : Newport News
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 153 tons (surfaced), 187
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 72900 x 12900 x 12930
M a c h i n e r y : 2 gasoline engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 240 bhp/120 shp =
8.5/4.5 knots
R a n g e : 385 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 35 nm
at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 3 x 150 torpedo tubes (2 bow,
1 stern)
C o m p l e m e n t : 24
N o t e s : These boats were modestly im-
proved production versions of the Protec-
tor. Newport News built the boats, which
then were disassembled for shipping and
reassembled at Libau. They all served
with the Baltic Fleet until stricken in
1913.

[ J A PA N ] —KAIGUN-HOLLAND TYPE (1905)

No. 6 (28 September 1905), No. 7 (28 Sep-
tember 1906)
B u i l d e r : Kawasaki
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 57 (No. 7: 78) tons (sur-
faced), 63 (No. 7: 95) tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 7 391 00 (No. 7: 7 4960) x 7900
(No. 7: 8900) x 6980 (No. 7: 7960)
M a c h i n e r y : 1 gasoline engine, 1 electric
m o t o r, 1 shaft. 250 bhp/22 shp = 8.5/4
knots
R a n g e : 184 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 12 nm
at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 1 x 180 torpedo tube (bow), to-
tal 1 torpedo
C o m p l e m e n t : 14
N o t e s : Imperial Japanese Navy designers
successfully worked with Holland design-
ers to develop a lighter, stronger hull for
these boats to increase their operational
depth, and placed more emphasis on sur-
face performance.
These boats were used mainly for
training and trials. The No. 6 accidentally
ﬂooded and sank in Hiroshima Bay on 15
April 1910 but was raised and returned
to service. Both boats were stricken in
1920.E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S 155

UNITED STAT E S : B CLASS (1906)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

C u t t l e f i s h (1 September 1906), Vi p e r ( 3 0
March 1907), Ta r a n t u l a (30 March
1907)
B u i l d e r : Fore River
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 145 tons (surfaced), 173
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 82940 x 12960 x 10960
M a c h i n e r y : 1 Craig gasoline engine, 1
Electro Dynamic electric motor, 1 shaft.
250 bhp/150 shp = 9/8 knots
R a n g e : 540 nm at 9 knots surfaced, 12 nm
at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 180 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 4 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 10
N o t e s : An enlargement of the previous
Holland single-hull design ﬁtted with two
side-by-side bow torpedo tubes and a
more substantial conning tower and
bridge structure. They latter were fitted
with a second periscope.
After brief service in home waters all
of these boats were transferred to the Asi-
atic Fleet, where they operated until
stricken between 1919 and 1921.156 E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S

C CLASS ( 1 9 0 6 )

Octopus (4 October 1906), Stingray (8 April
1909), Ta r p o n (8 April 1909), S n a p p e r
(16 June 1909), Bonita (17 June 1909)
B u i l d e r : Fore River
[ A u s t r i a - H u n g a r y ] —U - 5 (10 Fe b r u a r y
1909), U - 6 (12 June 1909), U - 1 2 ( 1 4
March 1911)
B u i l d e r : Whitehead
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 238 tons (surfaced), 275
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 105940 x 13990 x 99100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 gasoline engines, 1 electric
m o t o r, 2 shafts. 500 bhp/300 shp =
10.5/9 knots
R a n g e : 800 nm at 10.5 knots surfaced, 80
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 180 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 4 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 15
N o t e s : An enlarged version of the earlier
single-hull type, this class, designed by
Lawrence Y. Spear, introduced two-shaft
machinery that greatly extended its
range. The U.S. boats later were fitted
with a second periscope. Components for
the ﬁrst two Austrian boats were manu-
factured by the Electric Boat Company
and assembled at Fiume, while the third
boat was a speculative private venture by
Whitehead that failed to ﬁnd a buyer and
was purchased by Austria-Hungary upon
the outbreak of World War I. The U-5 re-
ceived a large conning tower and a 75mm
deck gun when repaired after sinking in
1917.
The U.S. boats operated with the A t-
lantic Submarine Flotilla until mid-1913,
when they transferred to Guantanamo in
Cuba. In early 1914 they moved to the
Panama Canal Zone, where they served
until decommissioned and stricken at the
end of 1919.
The earlier Austrian boats served to
train crews prior to the war. The U-6 b e-
came trapped in the Otranto barrage
nets and was scuttled on 13 May 1916.
The U-12 was mined and sunk on 12 A u-
gust 1916 while attempting to penetrate
the harbor at Venice. The U-5 struck a
mine and sank on 16 May 1917, was
raised, returned to service, and was
ceded to Italy as war reparations; it was
scrapped in 1920.E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S 157

[ R U S S I A ] —K A I M A N CLASS (1907)

Kaiman (November 1907), Krokodil (1908),
Alligator (1908), Drakon (27 June 1908)
B u i l d e r : Crichton
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 409 tons (surfaced), 482
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 132900 x 14900 x 16900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 gasoline engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 1200 bhp/400 shp =
10.5/7 knots
R a n g e : 1050 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 40
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 450mm torpedo tubes (2
b o w, 2 stern), 2 x 450mm torpedoes
(Drzewiecki drop-collars). 1 x 47mm
guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 34
N o t e s : Lake designed these boats as pow-
erful long-range submarines for Russia
(they were termed “cruisers” at the time).
Defects required a prolonged period for
correction, and they were not accepted
for service until 1910. All served with the
Baltic Fleet until they were laid up on 15
November 1916. They were scuttled at
Reval on 25 February 1918.

[ A U S T R I A - H U N G A RY ] —U-1 CLASS (1909)

U-1 (10 February 1909), U-2 (3 April 1909)
B u i l d e r : Pola
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 230 tons (surfaced), 249
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 100900 x 15990 x 12980
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Lake gasoline engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 720 bhp/200
shp = 10.25/6 knots
R a n g e : 950 nm at 6 knots surfaced, 40 nm
at 2 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 3 x 450mm torpedo tubes (2
b o w, 1 stern), total 5 torpedoes, 1 x
37mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 17
N o t e s : When the Austro-Hungarian Navy
decided to add submarines to its ﬂeet, it
elected to acquire examples from each of
the leading manufacturers of the time.
This class was built under license from
Lake and featured his trademark re-
tractable wheels for running on the
seabed, a diver’s egress chamber, and
variable pitch propellers. Overall, the
Lake boats had the best diving and han-
dling qualities, but their engines were
unreliable and were replaced by diesel
engines in 1913. Both boats served pri-
marily as trials and training vessels until
they were stricken on 11 January 1918.158 E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S

D CLASS (1909)

N a r w h a l (8 April 1909), G r a y l i n g (16 June
1909), Salmon (12 March 1910)
B u i l d e r : Fore River
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 288 tons (surfaced), 337
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 1359100 x 13990 x 119100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Craig gasoline engines, 2
Electro Dynamic electric motors, 2
shafts. 600 bhp/260 shp = 12/9.5 knots
R a n g e : 1240 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 80
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 180 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 4 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 15
N o t e s : This design was a greatly enlarged
version of the previous two-shaft single-
hull Electric Boat type. It featured a very
substantial deck casing and bridge struc-
ture to enhance seaworthiness and in-
cluded two periscopes from the outset.
This was the ﬁrst submarine design to in-
clude internal watertight bulkheads di-
viding the hull into compartments.
These boats served with the A t l a n t i c
Fleet, primarily undertaking training mis-
sions, until they were stricken in 1922.

[THE NETHERLANDS]—O - 2 CLASS (1911)

O-2 (30 January 1911), O-3 (30 June 1912),
O - 4 (5 August 1913), O - 5 (2 October
1913)
B u i l d e r : De Schelde
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 130 tons (surfaced), 150
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 102910 x 10920 x 9960
M a c h i n e r y : 1 MAN diesel engine, 1 elec-
tric motor, 1 shaft. 350 bhp/200 shp =
11/8.5 knots
R a n g e : 500 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 26
nm at 8.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 450mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 4 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 10
N o t e s : Whitehead and Company at Fiume
acquired a license from the Electric Boat
Company to construct Holland type sub-
marines in 1906. It hired Marley F.
Hay—who had overseen construction of
two Holland Type VII submarines be-
tween 1900 and 1904 at Union Iron
Works in San Francisco and another at
the Koninklijke Maatschappij De Schelde
between 1904 and 1906—to supervise
construction of two such boats for the
Austro-Hungarian Navy. Hay subse-
quently developed a modified version of
the single-hull Holland design, adding a
full-length deck casing and a substantial
bridge to improve seaworthiness. White-
head licensed Hay’s design to The
Netherlands for construction of its sec-
ond class of submarines.
The O-2 sank after colliding with a
fishing vessel on 26 February 1919 but
was reﬂoated and returned to service. All
four boats were stricken between 1931
and 1935.E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S 159

SEAL (8 FEBRUARY 1911)

B u i l d e r : Newport News
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 400 tons (surfaced), 516
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 161900 x 13910 x 12960
M a c h i n e r y : 4 White and Middleton gaso-
line engines, 2 Diehl electric motors, 2
shafts. 1200 bhp/520 shp = 14/10 knots
R a n g e : 2500 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 70
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 180 torpedo tubes (2 bow, 2
twin trainable deck mounts), total 6 tor-
pedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 24
N o t e s : The ﬁrst Lake boat accepted by the
U.S. Navy, the Seal was a single-hull
design with internal ballast tanks,
retractable wheels for running on the
bottom, an airlock allowing a diver egress
and ingress, and three sets of hy-
droplanes along the length of the hull.
There was a substantial watertight super-
structure, and four of the torpedo tubes
were in twin trainable deck mountings
fore and aft of the bridge/conning tower
structure.
One pair of engines and the deck tor-
pedo tube mounts were removed in a De-
cember 1916 reﬁt.
The Seal operated with the A t l a n t i c
Fleet primarily on training missions until
decommissioned on 6 March 1920.

E CLASS (1911)

Skipjack (27 May 1911), Sturgeon (15 June
1911)
B u i l d e r : Fore River
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 287 tons (surfaced), 342
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 135920 x 14950 x 119100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 NLSECO diesel engines, 2
Electro Dynamic electric motors, 2
shafts. 700 bhp/600 shp = 13.5/11.5
knots
R a n g e : 2100 nm at 11 knots surfaced, 100
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 180 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 4 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 20
N o t e s : These boats were essentially diesel-
engined diminutives of the earlier  single-
hull Electric Boat–type D class sub-
marines. In addition to introducing diesel
engines into U.S. submarines, they also
were the first both to use bow hy-
droplanes in addition to the planes at the
stern and to carry radio on delivery. The
diesel engines proved unreliable and
were replaced in 1915.
Both boats operated with the Atlantic
Fleet on training missions until the end
of 1917. They then undertook war pa-
trols until the end of World War I, when
they reverted to training status until de-
commissioned and stricken in late 1921.160 E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S

F CLASS (1911)

C a r p (6 September 1911), B a r r a c u d a ( 1 9
March 1912)
B u i l d e r : Union Iron Works
Pickerel (6 January 1912), Skate (6 January
1912)
B u i l d e r : Seattle
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 330 tons (surfaced), 400
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 142990 x 15950 x 12920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 NLSECO diesel engines, 2
Electro Dynamic electric motors, 2
shafts. 800 bhp/620 shp = 13.5/11.5
knots
R a n g e : 2300 nm at 11 knots surfaced, 100
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 180 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 4 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 22
N o t e s : These were slightly larger versions
of the E class boats with bigger conning
towers within the bridge structure. These
boats too suffered from diesel engine
problems and were re-engined in 1915.
All four boats served with the Pa c i ﬁc
Fleet. The F-1 (formerly the C a r p) ran
ashore near Watsonville, California, on
11 October 1912 and was refloated a
week later. On 17 December 1917 it col-
lided with its sister F-3 (formerly the
Pickerel) and sank with the loss of 19 of
its crew. The F-4 (formerly the S k a t e)
sank with the loss of all of its crew off
Honolulu on 25 March 1915 as a result
of mechanical failure. The two other
boats were stricken in 1922.

[ D E N M A R K ] —H AVMANDEN CLASS (1911)
Havmanden (23 December 1911), T h e t i s A r m a m e n t : 2 x 457mm torpedo tubes
(19 June 1912), 2den April (31 March (bow)
1913) C o m p l e m e n t : 10
B u i l d e r : Whitehead N o t e s : The Royal Danish Navy adopted an
Havfruen (31 August 1912), Najaden ( 9 enlarged version of the original Hay-
June 1913), Nymfen (10 February 1914) Whitehead single-hull design for its ﬁrst
B u i l d e r : Copenhagen submarines, contracting with Whitehead
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 164 tons (surfaced), 204 for three boats and purchasing a license
tons (submerged) to construct further examples itself. Two
D i m e n s i o n s : 127980 x 119100 x 7970 8mm machines guns were ﬁtted in 1917.
M a c h i n e r y : 1 MAN (Whitehead boats: These boats spent most of their ca-
Fiat) diesel engine, 2 electric motors, 1 reers in the naval reserve and were
shaft. 450 bhp/275 shp (Whitehead scrapped between 1928 and 1929.
boats: 430 bhp/270 shp) = 13/10 knotsE A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S 161

UNITED STATES: G CLASS (1912), T U R B O T ( 1 9 1 3 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Tuna (10 January 1912), Turbot (27 Decem-
ber 1913)
B u i l d e r : Lake
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 400 tons (surfaced), 516
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 161900 x 13910 x 12960
M a c h i n e r y : 4 White and Middleton gaso-
line (Tu r b o t : Sulzer diesel) engines, 2
Diehl electric motors, 2 shafts. 1200
bhp/600 shp = 14/10.5 knots
R a n g e : 2500 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 70
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 (Tu r b o t : 6) x 180 t o r p e d o
tubes (2/4 bow, 2 stern), total 4/6
torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 24
N o t e s : The second Lake design for the
navy was very similar to the Seal but dis-
pensed with the wheels and diver’s lock.
Two fixed torpedo tubes at the stern re-
placed the two twin deck tube mounts,
reducing the extent of the superstructure
considerably. The Turbot required the ad-
dition of midship blisters to compensate
for excessive top weight.
These boats operated as training and
experimental vessels throughout their ca-
reers with the Atlantic Fleet.162 E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S

UNITED STAT E S : H CLASS (1913), H - 2 ( 1 9 1 6 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

S e a w o l f (6 May 1913), N a u t i l u s (4 June
1913)
B u i l d e r : Union Iron Works
G a r f i s h (3 June 1913), [Canada]—C C - 1 ,
CC-2 (1913)
B u i l d e r : Seattle
[United Kingdom]—H - 1–H - 1 0 ( 1 9 1 5 ) ,
[ I t a l y ] —H - 1 (16 October 1916), H - 2 ( 1 9
October 1916), H - 3 (26 April 1917), H - 4
(17 April 1917), H - 5 (25 April 1917), H - 6
(23 April 1917), H - 7 (24 April 1917), H - 8
(24 April 1917), [Russia]—AG - 2 1–AG - 2 6
( 1 9 1 7 – 1 9 2 1 )
B u i l d e r : Canadian Vickers
[United Kingdom]—H-11, H-12, H-14, H-
15 (1916), [Chile]—H 1–H 6 (1916)
B u i l d e r : Fore River
[ R u s s i a ] —AG - 1 1–AG - 1 5 (1916), [United
States]—H-4 (9 October 1918), H-5 (24
September 1918), H-6 (26 August 1918),
H-7 (17 October 1918), H-8 (14 Novem-
ber 1918), H-9 (23 November 1918)
B u i l d e r : British Paciﬁc
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 358 (CC boats: 313) tons
(surfaced), 467 (CC boats: 421) tons
(submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 1 5 0930 (C C - 1 : 1 4 4960) x
15930 x 12960 (CC boats: 11900)
M a c h i n e r y : 2 NLSECO (first 5 boats:
MAN) diesel engines, 2 electric motors,
2 shafts. 960 (ﬁrst 5 boats: 600) bhp/600
(CC boats: 260) shp = 14 (ﬁrst ﬁve boats:
13)/11 (CC boats: 10) knots
R a n g e : 2300 nm at 11 knots surfaced, 100
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 180 (Italian boats: 450mm)
torpedo tubes (bow), total 8 torpedoes.
(C C - 1 : 5 x 180 torpedo tubes [4 bow, 1
stern], total 5 torpedoes, C C - 2 : 3 x 180
torpedo tubes [2 bow, 1 stern], total 3
torpedoes)
C o m p l e m e n t : 25E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S 163

N o t e s : This Electric Boat–type, single-hull
design was prepared originally for the
Chilean Navy, which ordered two boats
as the Iquique and the A n t o f a g a s t a i n
1911. Chile rejected them, however, and
they were purchased by Canada upon the
outbreak of World War I. The U.S. Navy
shortly afterward ordered three boats that
combined the four bow tubes of the
Iquique and the longer hull of the Antofa-
g a s t a . These three U.S. boats were re-
engined with NLSECO 480-bhp engines
in 1918.
In 1914 the Royal Navy ordered
twenty similar submarines from Electric
Boat. To circumvent U.S. neutrality the
ﬁrst ten, ordered in October, were assem-
bled by Canadian Vickers, but the second
group, ordered in December, was im-
pounded until the United States entered
the war. Four of this group then joined
the Royal Navy, while Britain gave ﬁve to
Chile as compensation for warships un-
der construction in the United Kingdom
that had been seized when war began;
Chile also purchased one additional Brit-
ish boat. Italy also placed an order in the
summer of 1915 for eight boats supplied
via Canadian Vickers.
The Imperial Russian Navy also
ordered boats of this type. Five were or-
dered from the British Paciﬁc Construc-
tion and Engineering Company at Va n-
couver in September 1915, three early in
1916, three more that summer, and a ﬁ-
nal group of eight in March 1917. The
ﬁrst three orders were delivered for ﬁnal
assembly in Russia (the British Pa c i f i c
boats at Petrograd and the Canadian
Vickers boats at Nikolayev), but the order
for the ﬁnal eight boats was canceled af-
ter the Russian Revolution and they were
completed for the U.S. Navy at Puget
Sound Navy Yard.
The three U.S. named boats became
H - 1 , H - 2 , and H - 3 before completion.
They served on the West Coast during
World War I. H - 1 was wrecked off Baja
California in March 1920, and all the
other U.S. boats were stricken in 1930.
The Canadian boats served on the
West Coast and were joined by the British
H - 1 4 and H - 1 5 , which became the C H -
1 4 and the C H - 1 5 . All four boats were
scrapped in 1925. The other British boats
were very active in the North Sea and
Mediterranean during World War I. The
H - 6 grounded on the Dutch coast on 18
January 1916 and was interned. In May it
was purchased and became the O - 8 . T h e
O - 8 sank in port at Den Helder in Octo-
ber 1921 and was raised and repaired by
September 1922. It was seized by Ger-
man forces in May 1940 and became the
U D - 1 , serving as a trials boat until it was
scuttled at Kiel on 3 May 1945. The H - 3
was mined in the Gulf of Cattaro on 15
July 1916; the H - 1 0 was lost in the North
Sea on 19 January 1918, probably to a
mine; the H - 5 was rammed and sunk by
the steamer R u t h e r g l e n on 15 July 1918
in the Irish Sea when it was mistaken for
a U-boat. The remaining British boats
were sold for scrap in 1921.
The Italian boats saw extensive service
in the Mediterranean and Adriatic. The
H - 5 was mistakenly torpedoed and sunk
by the British H-1 in the Adriatic on 16
April 1918; the H - 8 was bombed and
sunk at La Spezia on 5 June 1943; the
H - 6 was sunk at Bonifacio on 14 Sep-
tember 1943. The H - 7 was stricken in
1930, the H-3 in 1937, and the remain-
ing boats in 1947.
The Chilean boats were named the
G u a c o l d a , the Te g u a l d a , the R u c u m i l l a ,
the Quidora, the Fresia, and the Guale in
1936. The Rucumilla sank in an accident
on 2 June 1937 with the loss of the entire
crew but was raised and returned to ser-
vice. All six boats were stricken between
1945 and 1953.164 E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S

The Russian Baltic Fleet boats served
actively until scuttled at Hango on 3 April
1918, apart from the AG - 1 4 , which was
mined and sunk off Libau on 6 July
1917. The Black Sea Fleet boats did not
commission prior to the Russian Revolu-
tion. The AG - 2 1 was seized by German
forces at Sevastopol in April 1918, trans-
ferred to Allied control in November, and
scuttled there on 26 April 1919. It was
salved in 1928, rebuilt, and commis-
sioned into the Soviet Fleet as the No. 16
on 30 December 1930. The AG - 2 2 w a s
commissioned in Admiral Wrangel’s
White Russian Fleet in 1919, escaped
the Black Sea to Bizerta in 1920, and was
abandoned and sold for scrap in Novem-
ber 1923. The other Black Sea sub-
marines were completed and commis-
sioned in the Soviet Navy as the Tr o t s k y
(later the N e z a m o z h n i y and then the
S h a k t e r), the K o m m u n i s t , the M a r k s i s t ,
and the Po l i t r a b o t n i k . On 1 July 1923
they were renamed the No. 12 t h r o u g h
the No. 15. The ﬁve Soviet boats became
the A - 1 to the A - 5 on 15 September
1934. The A-1 was scuttled at Sevastopol
in June 1942; the A - 3 was sunk by the
German submarine chaser UJ-117 off the
Tendra Peninsular on 4 November 1943;
and the other boats were stricken in late
1943 and scrapped after World War II.

[THE NETHERLANDS]—K - I (20 MAY 1913)

B u i l d e r : De Schelde
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 330 tons (surfaced), 386
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 159950 x 15950 x 10920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 1800 bhp/500 shp =
16/8.5 knots
R a n g e : 3500 nm at 11 knots surfaced, 30
nm at 8.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 3 x 450mm torpedo tubes (2
bow, 1 stern), total 6 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 17
N o t e s : Hay enlarged his original White-
head design and modified it to incorpo-
rate a two-shaft machinery arrangement
that allowed ﬁtting a stern torpedo tube.
The single-hull design incorporated three
ballast tanks and also carried both bow
and stern rudders for increased maneu-
v e r a b i l i t y. Whitehead and Company
licensed this new design to The Nether-
lands for use in the construction of its
first submarine for service in the East
Indies.
The K - I operated in home waters for
two years. It transferred to the Dutch
East Indies, arriving at Sabang on 6 No-
vember 1916. It served in the East Indies
until stricken in 1928.E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S 165

UNITED STATES: K CLASS (1913), K - 5 ( 1 9 1 4 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

H a d d o c k (3 September 1913), C a c h a l o t ( 4
October 1913), K-5 (17 March 1914), K-
6 (26 March 1914)
B u i l d e r : Fore River
Orca (14 March 1914), K-7 (20 June 1914),
K-8 (11 June 1914)
B u i l d e r : Union Iron Works
Walrus (19 March 1914)
B u i l d e r : Seattle
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 392 tons (surfaced), 521
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 153970 x 16990 x 13910
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 950 bhp/600 shp =
14/10.5 knots
R a n g e : 4500 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 120
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 180 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 8 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 28
N o t e s : Modestly enlarged versions of ear-
lier Electric Boat single-hull boats, these
submarines encountered major problems
with their engines, considerably delaying
their entry into service. Nevertheless, the
West Coast boats cruised as far as
H a w a i’i, while the Atlantic Fleet boats
operated in the Azores during World War
I. All boats were decommissioned in
1923, laid up, and scrapped in 1931.166 E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S

[ D E N M A R K ] —Æ G I R CLASS (1914)

Ægir (8 December 1914), Ran (30 May
1915), Triton (29 June 1915), N e p t u n
(22 December 1915), Galathea (15 April
1916)
B u i l d e r : Copenhagen
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 185 tons (surfaced), 235
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 133920 x 12920 x 79110
M a c h i n e r y : 1 diesel engine, 1 electric mo-
tor, 1 shaft. 450 bhp/340 shp = 13.5/9.75
knots
A r m a m e n t : 3 x 457mm torpedo tubes
(bow), 1 x 57mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 11
N o t e s : Marley F. Hay moved to the
Dumbarton shipyard of William Denny
and Brothers in 1913 and developed a
slightly modified version of his earlier
Whitehead single-hull design, enlarged
to accommodate an additional torpedo
tube in the bow. This was adopted for the
second class of Danish submarines. Con-
struction of a sixth vessel was canceled
with the end of World War I.
These boats served actively with the
Submarine Flotilla. The Ægir and the
Neptun were stricken on 26 April 1933,
and the other boats went into the reserve.
They became ﬂoating oil depots at Hol-
men in 1943 and were scrapped in 1946.

L CLASS (1915)

L - 1 (20 January 1915), L - 2 (11 Fe b r u a r y
1915), L-3 (15 March 1915), L-4 (3 April
1915), L-9 (27 October 1915), L-10 (16
March 1916), L-11 (16 May 1916)
B u i l d e r : Fore River
L-5 (1 May 1916)
B u i l d e r : Lake
L - 6 (11 August 1916), L - 7 (28 September
1916)
B u i l d e r : Craig
L-8 (23 April 1917)
B u i l d e r : Portsmouth
[Norway]—B1 (1 August 1922), B2 (15 Au-
gust 1923), B 3 (25 January 1924), B 4
(19 December 1923), B5 (17 June 1929),
B6 (4 September 1929)
B u i l d e r : Horten
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 450 tons (surfaced), 548
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 167940 x 17950 x 13950
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 1200 bhp/800 shp =
14/10.5 knots
R a n g e : 3300 nm at 11 knots surfaced, 150
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 180 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 8 torpedoes, 1 x 30 gun (AA gun in
Norwegian boats)
C o m p l e m e n t : 28
N o t e s : These further enlargements of Elec-
tric Boat single hull–type submarines also
encountered major machinery problems,
delaying their entry into service. They
were the ﬁrst U.S. Navy submarines de-
signed to carry a deck gun, which was on
a semiretractable mount to minimize drag
under water. The Norwegian boats used
essentially the same design. Their build-
ing times were very extended (B1 was laid
down in 1915 and B6 in 1925) because of
the Horten Navy Ya r d ’s lack of submarine
construction experience.
L - 6–L - 8 were built to a Lake design,
incorporating a double hull, diving planes
amidships, a wide stern, and egress
chamber for divers. Their building timesE A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S 167

were protracted because Lake’s o r i g i n a l
company went into bankruptcy in the
summer of 1916.
The Fore River boats operated from
Bantry Bay in Ireland during World War
I. All the U.S. Navy boats were decom-
missioned in the early 1920s and sold for
scrap. The Norwegian boats served in the
North Sea until the outbreak of Wo r l d
War II. The B 1 and the B2 escaped the
German invasion in 1940 and reached
Britain, where they served as antisubma-
rine training vessels until April 1944. The
B3 was scuttled on 9 June 1940. The re-
maining Norwegian submarines were
captured by Germany, and two, the B 5
and the B 6 , entered German service as
the U C - 1 and the U C - 2 . The U C - 1 w a s
stricken in 1942 and the UC-2 in 1944.

[ R U S S I A ] —N A R VA L CLASS (1915)

Narval (10 May 1915), Kashalot (1915), Kit
(1915)
B u i l d e r : Nevski Nikolayev
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 621 tons (surfaced), 760
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 230940 x 21980 x 11960
M a c h i n e r y : 4 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 640 bhp/980 shp =
13/9.75 knots
R a n g e : 1900 nm at 7 knots surfaced, 120
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 180 torpedo tubes (2 bow, 2
stern), 8 (N a r v a l : 4) x 180 t o r p e d o e s
(Drzewiecki drop collars), total 12/8 tor-
pedoes, 1 x 75mm gun, 1 x 63mm gun
(not Narval)
C o m p l e m e n t : 47
N o t e s : The ﬁrst double-hull Electric Boat
design was originally specified to have
more powerful engines, for a surface
speed of 16 knots. The new arrangement
of ballast and trim tanks, made possible
by the double hull, dramatically improved
diving time to 60 seconds to reach
periscope depth, one-third the time re-
quired for earlier single-hull Holland
boats, but the boats were cramped inter-
n a l l y. These boats all served with the
Black Sea Fleet. Germany captured these
submarines in May 1918 and surren-
dered them to Britain in November 1918.
They were scuttled off Sevastopol on 26
April 1919.168 E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S

UNITED STAT E S : M CLASS (1915)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

M - 1 (14 September 1915), [Spain]—I s a a c
Peral (27 June 1916)
B u i l d e r : Fore River
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 488 tons (surfaced), 676
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 196930 x 19900 x 11920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 840 bhp/680 shp =
14/10.5 knots
R a n g e : 2750 nm at 11 knots surfaced, 150
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 180 (Isaac Pe r a l : 4 5 0 m m )
torpedo tubes (bow), total 8 torpedoes, 1
x 30 gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 28
N o t e s : M-1 was the ﬁrst double-hull Elec-
tric Boat design for the U.S. Navy, a
change adopted to give greater reserve
buoyancy and a faster diving time than
the ﬁrm’s single-hull models. The change
also required the submarine to be larger
than its precursors, yet it was considered
cramped for internal space. The design
essentially was repeated for the Spanish
submarine, though that boat initially fea-
tured a deck along the center of the boat
above the casing that was deleted soon
after it entered service.
M-1 served in the Atlantic until it was
stricken in 1922. The Isaac Peral w a s
stricken in 1930.E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S 169

[THE NETHERLANDS]—O - 6 (10 JUNE 1916)

B u i l d e r : De Schelde
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 189 tons (surfaced), 229
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 117900 x 12960 x 10900
M a c h i n e r y : 1 MAN diesel engine, 1 elec-
tric motor, 1 shaft. 375 bhp/185 shp =
12/8.5 knots
R a n g e : 750 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 26
nm at 8.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 3 x 450mm torpedo tubes (2
b o w, 1 stern), total 5 torpedoes, 1 x
12.7mm machine gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 15
N o t e s : This boat was built to a single-hull
design by the Electric Boat Company
with two ballast tanks and a lead drop-
keel. The O-6 operated in the North Sea
and English Channel until stricken in
November 1936.

[THE NETHERLANDS]—O - 7 (22 JUNE 1916)

B u i l d e r : Fijenoord
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 176 tons (surfaced), 206
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 112940 x 12900 x 9960
M a c h i n e r y : 1 MAN diesel engine, 1 elec-
tric motor, 1 shaft. 350 bhp/185 shp =
12/8.5 knots
R a n g e : 750 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 26
nm at 8.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 3 x 450mm torpedo tubes (2
bow, 1 stern), total 5 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 15
N o t e s : This boat used another variant of
H a y ’s single-hull design under license
from Denny. It was unusual in incorpo-
rating an auxiliary steering propeller (a
type of side thruster) just forward of the
standard propeller and rudder at the
stern.
The O-7 operated in the North Sea
and English Channel until 1935, when it
became the navy’s training submarine. It
was stricken on 21 December 1939.170 E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S

[ A U S T R I A - H U N G A RY ] —U-20 CLASS (1916)

U-21 (15 August 1916), U-20 (18 Septem-
ber 1916)
B u i l d e r : Pola
U-23 (5 January 1917), U-22 (27 January
1917)
B u i l d e r : UBAG
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 173 tons (surfaced), 210
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 127920 x 13900 x 9900
M a c h i n e r y : 1 diesel engine, 1 electric mo-
t o r, 1 shaft. 450 bhp/160 shp = 12/9 knots
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 450mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 2 torpedoes, 1 x 66mm gun,
1 x 8mm machine gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 18
N o t e s : On the outbreak of war the Austro-
Hungarian government confiscated the
plans for the prewar Danish Havmanden
class boats from Whitehead and Com-
pany at Fiume and used essentially the
same design to construct these sub-
marines. Political tension between the
Hungarian and Austrian components of
the empire prolonged construction, so
they did not enter service until late 1917.
The U-23 was destroyed by an explo-
sive paravane towed by an escort while
attacking a convoy in the Straits of
Otranto on 21 February 1918. The Ital-
ian submarine F-12 torpedoed and sank
the U-20 near the estuary of the Taglia-
mento River on 6 July 1918. The Treaty
of Paris ceded the U-21 to Italy and the
U-22 to France. Both were handed over
in 1920 and scrapped.E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S 171

UNITED STATES: N CLASS (1916), N - 2 ( 1 9 1 7 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

N-1 (30 December 1916), N-2 (16 January
1917), N-3 (21 February 1917)
B u i l d e r : Seattle
N - 4 (27 November 1916), N - 5 (22 March
1917), N-6 (21 April 1917), N-7 (19 May
1917)
B u i l d e r : Lake
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 348 tons (surfaced), 414
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 147940 x 15990 x 12960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 600 bhp/300 shp =
13/11 knots
R a n g e : 3500 nm at 11 knots surfaced, 30
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 180 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 8 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 25
N o t e s : The design for the Electric Boat
single-hull class was based on the H -
class design, enhanced by adding a steel
bridge structure and reducing power
output to improve reliability. The Lake-
built boats were double-hull submarines
with diving planes amidships and wide
sterns. They were stricken in 1922, and
the others in 1931.172 E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S

[UNITED KINGDOM]—IMPROVED H CLASS (1917), H - 3 1 ( 1 9 1 8 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

H - 2 1 (20 October 1917), H - 2 2 (14 No-
vember 1917), H - 2 3 (29 January
1918), H - 2 4 (14 November 1917), H -
2 5 (27 April 1918), H - 2 6 (15 Novem-
ber 1917), H - 2 7 (25 September 1918),
H - 2 8 (12 March 1918), H - 2 9 (8 June
1918), H - 3 0 (9 May 1918), H - 3 1 ( 1 6
November 1918), H - 3 2 (19 November
1 9 1 8 )
B u i l d e r : Barrow
H-33 (24 August 1918), H-34 (5 November
1918)
B u i l d e r : Cammell Laird
H-42 (21 October 1918), H-43 (3 February
1919), H-44 (17 February 1919)
B u i l d e r : Armstrong
H - 4 7 (19 November 1918), H - 4 8 ( 3 1
March 1919), H - 4 9 (15 June 1919), H -
50 (25 October 1919)
B u i l d e r : Beardmore
H - 5 1 (15 November 1918), H - 5 2 ( 3 1
March 1919)
B u i l d e r : Pembroke
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 423 tons (surfaced), 510
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 171990 x 15990 x 13930
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 480 bhp/620 shp =
11/10.5 knots
R a n g e : 1600 nm at 10 knots surfaced;
submerged characteristics unknown
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 8 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 22
Notes: Vickers developed these boats from
the original H -class design by lengthen-
ing it to accommodate 21-inch torpedo
tubes. The machinery and much of the
equipment was identical to that of the
earlier boats and was obtained from the
same U.S. suppliers for the Vickers craft
and from British firms for the others.
Twelve additional submarines were can-
celed in October 1917 and their machin-
ery and equipment transferred for use in
R-class boats.E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S 173

This class served extensively in the
North Sea and Mediterranean during the
last part of World War I and between the
wars. The H-42 and the H-47 were sunk
in collisions in 1922 and 1929. Eight
boats (the H - 3 1–H - 3 4 , H - 4 3–H - 4 4 , H -
4 9–H - 5 0) served in World War II, and
the others were scrapped between 1934
and 1936. German antisubmarine vessels
sank the H - 3 1 and the H - 4 9 off the
Dutch coast on 18 October 1940, and
the surviving boats were scrapped be-
tween October 1944 and July 1945.

UNITED STATES: O CLASS (1917)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

O-1 (9 June 1918)
B u i l d e r : Portsmouth
O-2 (24 May 1918)
B u i l d e r : Puget Sound
O-3 (29 September 1917), O-4 (20 October
1917), O - 5 (11 November 1917), O - 6
(25 November 1917), O-7 (16 December
1917), O - 8 (31 December 1917), O - 9
(27 January 1918), O - 1 0 (21 Fe b r u a r y
1918)
B u i l d e r : Quincy
O-11 (29 October 1917), O-12 (29 Septem-
ber 1917), O-13 (27 December 1917)
B u i l d e r : Lake
O - 1 4 (6 May 1918), O - 1 5 (12 Fe b r u a r y
1918), O-16 (9 February 1918)
B u i l d e r : California
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 521 tons (surfaced), 629
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 172930 x 18910 x 14950
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 880 bhp/740 shp =
14/10.5 knots
R a n g e : 5500 nm at 11.5 knots surfaced,
150 nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 180 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 8 torpedoes, 1 x 30 gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 29
N o t e s : The design for this single-hull class
was essentially a slightly enlarged L-class
boat with the lower-rated power plant in-
corporated for greater reliability. The
boats built by California Shipbuilding
and Lake, built to a typical Lake double-
hull design with diving planes amidships
and wide sterns, were discarded in 1930.
Those built by Electric Boat (except for
the O - 5 , rammed and sunk by the
steamer Abangarez in the Canal Zone on
28 October 1923; the O-1, stricken on 18
March 1938; the O - 9 , lost because of a
mechanical failure on 20 June 1941)
served during World War II as training
vessels and were stricken in 1946.174 E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S

UNITED STATES: R CLASS (1917)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

R - 1 5 (10 December 1917) R - 1 6 (15 De-
cember 1917), R - 1 7 (24 December
1917), R-18 (8 January 1918), R-19 (28
January 1918), R-20 (21 August 1918)
B u i l d e r : Union Iron Works
R-21 (10 June 1918), R-22 (24 September
1918), R-23 (5 November 1918), R - 2 4
(21 August 1918), R-25 (15 May 1919),
R-26 (18 June 1919), R-27 (23 Septem-
ber 1919)
B u i l d e r : Lake
R - 1 (24 August 1918), R - 2 (23 September
1918), R - 3 (18 January 1919), R - 4 ( 2 6
October 1918), R - 5 (24 November
1918), R-6 (1 March 1919), R-7 (5 April
1919), R-8 (17 April 1919), R-9 (14 May
1919), R - 1 0 (28 June 1919), R - 1 1 ( 1 2
June 1919), R - 1 2 (15 August 1919), R -
13 (27 August 1919), R-14 (10 October
1919)
B u i l d e r : Quincy
[Peru]–—R1 (12 June 1926), R2 (29 March
1926), R 3 (21 April 1928), R 4 (10 May
1928)
B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 569 (R - 2 1 – R - 2 7 : 5 1 0 )
tons (surfaced), 680 (R - 2 1 – R - 2 7 : 5 8 3 )
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 186950 x 18910 x 14950
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 1200 bhp/934 shp =
13.5/10.5 knots (R - 2 1 – R - 2 7 : 1 0 0 0
bhp/800 shp = 14/11 knots)
R a n g e : 4700 nm at 6 knots surfaced, 100
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 210 (R-21–R-27: 180) tor-
pedo tubes (bow), total 8 torpedoes, 1 x
30 gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 29
N o t e s : These single-hull Electric Boat sub-
marines were very similar to the preced-
ing O class, with the addition of 21-inch
torpedo tubes and a ﬁxed rather than re-
tractable gun mount. The double-hull
Lake boats had their diving planes more
conventionally positioned fore and aft,
but they retained the characteristic wide
stern and 18-inch torpedo tubes. TheE A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S 175

boats for Peru were built after World War
I using material assembled for canceled
S-class submarines. They were reﬁtted in
1935–1936 and 1955–1956, renamed
the I s l a y, the C a s m a , the Pa c o c h a , a n d
the Arica in 1957, and discarded in 1960.
The Lake boats were discarded in
1930. The R-6 was stricken in 1936, but
the other single-hull boats survived to
serve in World War II. The R-3, the R-17,
and the R - 1 9 were transferred to the
Royal Navy under Lend-Lease and re-
named the P-511, the P-512, and the P-
5 1 4 (accidentally rammed and sunk by
the minesweeper G e o r g i a n on 21 June
1942). The R - 1 2 was lost as a training
vessel near Key West on 12 June 1943.
The remaining vessels were broken up
in 1946.

AA CLASS (1918)

Schley (25 June 1918), AA-2 (6 September
1919), AA-3 (24 May 1919)
B u i l d e r : Quincy
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1107 tons (surfaced),
1482 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 269900 x 23900 x 14910
M a c h i n e r y : 4 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 4000 bhp/1350 shp =
20/10.5 knots
R a n g e : 3000 nm at 14 knots surfaced, 100
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 180 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 12 torpedoes, 2 x 30 gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 38
N o t e s : The U.S. Navy’s interest in fast
submarines capable of accompanying the
battle ﬂeet ﬁrst emerged in 1911 and led
to the development of this class, intended
to meet requirements for high surface
speed, good sea keeping, and long range.
Although the class came close to meeting
these requirements, the boats were
plagued with unreliable machinery and
the form of the bow made them ex-
tremely wet at sea. The ﬁrst boat, initially
named the Schley, carried four additional
torpedo tubes on deck, but these quickly
were removed and were not ﬁtted to the
later boats. They were re-armed with a
single 4-inch gun in place of the 3-inch
weapons soon after completion. The
boats were renumbered the T- 1 t h r o u g h
the T-3 in 1920. The T-3 was re-engined
in 1925–1927, but its mechanical relia-
bility did not improve. These submarines
were stricken in 1930 after very little ac-
tive service and scrapped.

[ D E N M A R K ] —R O TA CLASS (1918)

Rota (16 August 1918), Bellona (14 March
1919), Flora (23 April 1920)
B u i l d e r : Copenhagen
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 301 tons (surfaced), 369
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 1559100 x 14950 x 89100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Burmeister and Wain diesel
engines, 2 Titan Electro electric motors,
1 shaft. 900 bhp/640 shp = 14.5/10.5
knots
A r m a m e n t : 4 (Rota 5) x 457mm torpedo
tubes (3 bow, 1 stern, Rota: 1 trainable in
conning tower), 1 x 57mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 17
N o t e s : This class used essentially the same
single-hull saddle-tank Hay design as the
Dutch overseas submarine K-I, under li-
cense from Denny, modified to carry
three bow torpedo tubes and a traversing
deck mount.176 E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S

The Rota carried a traversing torpedo
tube in its conning tower, but this
proved unsatisfactory in service and was
omitted from the rest of the class. In its
place the Bellona carried an enlarged ra-
dio room, and the Flora was equipped
for minelaying.
All three boats served actively with the
Submarine Flotilla until 1936, when they
transferred to the reserve. They were
scuttled at Holmen on 29 August 1943
and scrapped in 1952.

UNITED STATES: S CLASS (1918)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

ELECTRIC BOAT TYPE I
S-1 (26 October 1918), S-18 (29 A p r i l
1 9 2 0 ) , S-19 (21 June 1920), S-20 ( 9
June 1920), S-21 (18 August 1920), S-22
(15 June 1920), S-23 (27 October 1920),
S - 2 4 (27 June 1922), S - 2 5 (29 May
1922), S-26 (22 August 1922), S-27 (18
October 1922), S - 2 8 (20 September
1922), S-29 (9 November 1922)
B u i l d e r : Quincy
S - 3 0 (21 November 1918), S - 3 1 (28 De-
cember 1918), S - 3 2 (11 January 1919),
S-33 (5 December 1918), S-34 (13 Feb-
ruary 1919), S-35 (27 February 1919), S-
36 (3 June 1919), S-37 (20 June 1919),
S - 3 8 (17 June 1919), S - 3 9 (2 June
1919), S - 4 0 (5 January 1921), S - 4 1 ( 2 1
February 1921)
B u i l d e r : Union Iron Works
ELECTRIC BOAT TYPE II
S - 4 2 (30 April 1923), S - 4 3 (31 March
1923), S-44 (27 October 1923), S-45 (26
June 1923), S-46 (11 September 1923),
S-47 (5 January 1924)
B u i l d e r : Quincy
LAKE TYPE I
S-2 (15 February 1919)
B u i l d e r : Lake
LAKE TYPE II
S - 4 8 (26 February 1921), S - 4 9 (23 A p r i l
1921), S - 5 0 (18 June 1921), S - 5 1 ( 2 0
August 1921)
B u i l d e r : Lake
BU R E AU OF CONSTRUCTION A N D
REPAIR TYPE
S - 3 (21 December 1918), S - 4 (27 A u g u s t
1919), S-5 (10 November 1919), S-6 (23
December 1919), S-7 (5 February 1920),
S-8 (21 April 1920), S-9 (17 June 1920),
S-10 (9 December 1920), S-11 (7 Febru-
ary 1921), S - 1 2 (4 August 1921), S - 1 3
(20 October 1921)
B u i l d e r : PortsmouthE A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S 177

S - 1 4 (22 October 1919), S - 1 5 (8 March
1920), S - 1 6 (23 December 1919), S - 1 7
(22 May 1920)
B u i l d e r : Lake
D i s p l a c e m e n t : EBI: 854 tons (surfaced),
1062 tons (submerged), EBII: 906 tons
(surfaced), 1126 tons (submerged), Lake
I: 800 tons (surfaced), 977 tons (sub-
merged), Lake II: 903 tons (surfaced),
1230 tons (submerged), C&R: 876 tons
(surfaced), 1092 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : EBI: 219950 x 20980 x 15990,
EBII: 225950 x 20980 x 16910, Lake I:
207900 x 19980 x 16910, Lake II: 240920 x
2 1980 x 13950, C&R: 231900 x 22900 x
13910
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. EBI: 1200 bhp/1500
shp = 14/11 knots, EBII: 1200 bhp/1200
shp = 14.5/11 knots, Lake I: 1800
bhp/1200 shp = 15/11 knots, Lake II:
1800 bhp/1500 shp = 14.4/11 knots,
C&R: 2000 bhp/1500 shp = 15/11 knots
R a n g e : 2500–5900 nm at 6.5 knots sur-
faced, 100 nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 (Lake II: 5) x 210 t o r p e d o
tubes (bow), total 12 (Lake II: 14) torpe-
does, 1 x 40 gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 38
N o t e s : The first three boats of this class
were built to competing designs from
Electric Boat (a single-hull type), Lake,
and the Bureau of Construction and Re-
pair (both double-hull types). The Lake
design was found unsatisfactory, and the
firm built two series of boats to the bu-
r e a u ’s design, the original and an en-
larged version. Two series of boats also
used the Electric Boat design, the second
series being enlarged.
The S - 5 was lost in an accident on 1
September 1920. The steamer City of
Rome sank the S-51 in a collision on 25
September 1925 off Block Island. The S-
4 sank after colliding with the destroyer
Pa u l d i n g (then serving with the Coast
Guard) on 17 December 1927, with the
loss of the entire crew. It was salved, re-
paired, and returned to service in Octo-
ber 1928 and stricken in 1936, along
with the S - 1 0 and the S - 1 9 . The S - 4 9
and the S-50 were stricken in 1931; the
S - 6 through the S - 9 were stricken in
1937; and the remainder of the class
served during World War II.
The S-1, the S-21, the S-22, the S-24,
the S - 2 5 , and the S - 2 9 were transferred
to Britain under Lend-Lease, becoming
the P-552, the P-553, the P-555, the Jas-
t r z a b (in Polish service), and the P - 5 5 6 .
The S - 3 6 was wrecked in the Makassar
Strait on 20 January 1942; the S-26 was
sunk in collision with the PC-460 in the
Gulf of Panama on 24 January 1942; the
S-27 was wrecked on Amchitka Island in
Alaska on 19 June 1942; the S - 3 9 w a s
wrecked near Rossel Island on 14 August
1942; the S-44 was sunk by the Japanese
escort I s h i g a ki on 7 October 1943; the
S-28 was lost at sea (cause unknown) on
4 July 1944. The S - 1 6 , the S - 1 7 , the S -
37, and the S-38 were sunk as targets in
1945. The surviving boats of the class
were stricken in 1946.178 E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S

[THE NETHERLANDS]—K - I I (24 FEBRUARY 1919)

B u i l d e r : Fijenoord
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 569 tons (surfaced), 649
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 177920 x 16990 x 12960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 1800 bhp/500 shp =
16/8.5 knots
R a n g e : 3500 nm at 16 knots surfaced, 26
nm at 8.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 450mm torpedo tubes (2
b o w, 2 stern), total 12 torpedoes, 1 x
75mm AA gun, 1 x 12.7mm machine gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 29
N o t e s : Hay prepared an enlarged version
of his single-hull saddle-tank design for
the K-I for this boat, whose construction
again was licensed by Denny. In
1923–1924 the Royal Netherlands Navy
conducted trials of a diesel air intake
tube system that extended above the
periscope, but they removed the equip-
ment because of problems with the valve
arrangement intended to prevent ingress
of water if a wave washed over the top of
the tube.
The K-II’s commissioning was delayed
by problems with completing and in-
stalling its German diesel engines in
wartime. From 1923 it operated exten-
sively in the East Indies and Far East un-
til stricken in August 1937.

[THE NETHERLANDS]—K - I I I CLASS (1919)

K-III (12 August 1919), K-IV (2 June 1920),
K - V I I I (28 March 1922), K - I X (23 De-
cember 1922), K-X (2 May 1923)
B u i l d e r : De Schelde
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 574 tons (surfaced), 710
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 210900 x 18940 x 119100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Sulzer (K-III and K - V I I I :
MAN) diesel engines, 2 electric motors,
2 shafts. 1200 (K-III a n d K - V I I I : 1 8 0 0 ,
K-IX and K - X : 1550) bhp/630 shp = 15
(K-III and K-VIII: 16.5)/9 knots
R a n g e : 3500 nm at 11 knots surfaced, 26
nm at 9 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 450mm torpedo tubes
(2 bow, 1 twin training external mount
[K-III and K - I V], 2 stern [K - V I I – K - X] ) ,
total 12 torpedoes), 1 x 75mm AA
(K - V I I I – K - X : 88mm DP) gun, 1 x
12.7mm machine gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 29
N o t e s : These boats used an Electric Boat
Company double-hull design with five
ballast tanks. The later group had a mod-
iﬁed arrangement of the torpedo tubes to
reduce vulnerability to depth-charge
damage, an enlarged conning tower and
bridge, longer periscopes, and a heavier
deck gun.E A R LY SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S 179

[THE NETHERLANDS]—K - V CLASS (1919)

K-V (2 November 1919), K-VI (23 Decem-
ber 1920), K-VII (8 March 1921)
B u i l d e r : Fijenoord
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 560 tons (surfaced), 640
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 177900 x 16990 x 12960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Sulzer diesel engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 1200 bhp/500
shp = 15/8 knots
R a n g e : 3500 nm at 11 knots surfaced, 26
nm at 9 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 450mm torpedo tubes (2
b o w, 2 stern, 1 twin training external
mount), total 12 torpedoes, 1 x 75mm AA
gun, 1 x 12.7mm machine gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 31
N o t e s : This was a more heavily armed vari-
ant of Hay’s single-hull saddle-tank de-
sign for the K-II. Originally a pair of 900-
bhp MAN diesel engines were specified
but were not available in wartime, so less
powerful 600-bhp Sulzer engines were
installed.
All three boats operated extensively in
the East Indies and Far East until decom-
missioned in August 1937. The K-V and
the K-VI were scrapped, but the K - V I I
was retained in reserve at Soerabaja,
where it was bombed and sunk by Japa-
nese aircraft on 18 February 1942.

[ S PA I N ] —B CLASS (1921)

B-1 (2 June 1921), B-2 (10 October 1921),
B-3 (17 March 1922), B-4 (31 October
1922), B - 6 (5 June 1923), B-5 (4 A p r i l
1925)
B u i l d e r : Cartagena
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 491 tons (surfaced), 715
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 210940 x 17940 x 11930
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 1400 bhp/850 shp =
16/10 knots
R a n g e : 8000 nm at 10.5 knots surfaced,
125 nm at 4.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 450mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 8 torpedoes, 1 x 75mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 28
N o t e s : Electric Boat licensed the construc-
tion of these boats as a slightly enlarged
version of the Isaac Pe r a l . C o n s t r u c t i o n
began in July 1916 and was delayed by
the yard’s inexperience in submarine
work. The B - 6 was sunk by the Spanish
Nationalist destroyer Ve l a s c o near San-
tander on 19 September 1936, and the
B - 5 was sunk by Nationalist aircraft off
Malaga on 12 October 1936. The Repub-
licans scuttled the surviving boats in
April 1939.A War-Winning Weapon?

D E N M A R K
D A P H N E CLASS (1925)
Daphne (December 1925), Dryaden (3 June A r m a m e n t : 6 x 450mm torpedo tubes (4
1926) bow, 2 stern), 1 x 75mm gun, 1 x 20mm
B u i l d e r : Copenhagen AA gun
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 308 tons (surfaced), 381 C o m p l e m e n t : 25
tons (submerged) N o t e s : This class was designed by the Or-
D i m e n s i o n s : 160990 x 17910 x 8920 logsværftet and was very heavily armed for
M a c h i n e r y: 2 Burmeister and Wain diesel its size. These submarines were scuttled at
engines, 2 Titan electric motors, 2 shafts. Holmen on 29 August 1943, salved subse-
1200 bhp/400 shp = 13.5/6.75 knots q u e n t l y, and scrapped in 1946.

H AV M A N D E N CLASS (1937)

H a v m a n d e n (19 June 1937), H a v f r u e n ( 6
November 1937), H a v k a l e n (3 March
1938), Havhesten (11 July 1940)
B u i l d e r : Copenhagen
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 320 tons (surfaced), 402
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 157960 x 15950 x 9920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Burmeister and Wain diesel
engines, 2 Brown-Boveri electric motors,
2 shafts. 1200 bhp/450 shp = 15/8 knots
A r m a m e n t : 5 x 450mm torpedo tubes (3
b o w, 2 stern), 2 x 40mm AA guns, 2 x
8mm machine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 20
N o t e s : This class was designed by the
Orlogsværftet as an improved version of
the previous boats. A fifth boat of this
class was canceled. They were scuttled at
Holmen on 29 August 1943.

181182 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: FRANCE

F R A N C E
PIERRE CHAILLEY (19 DECEMBER 1921)

B u i l d e r : Normand
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 884 tons (surfaced), 1191
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 229980 x 24970 x 13910
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Sulzer diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 1800 bhp/1400 shp
= 13.75/8.5 knots
R a n g e : 2800 nm at 11 knots surfaced, 80
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 450mm torpedo tubes (2
bow, 1 twin trainable external mount), to-
tal 6 torpedoes, 40 mines
C o m p l e m e n t : 44
N o t e s : This large double-hull minelaying
submarine was designed by A u g u s t i n
Normand and Fernand Fenaux. The
mines were carried in vertical external
tubes, ten on each side, that became the
French Navy’s standard method, as it was
extremely safe. The Pierre Chailley oper-
ated mainly in the Mediterranean and
was stricken on 13 May 1936.

R E Q U I N CLASS (1924)

Requin (19 July 1924), Soufﬂeur (1 October
1924), N a r v a l (9 May 1925), M o r s e ( 1 1
November 1925), Caïman (3 March
1927)
B u i l d e r : Cherbourg
Marsouin (27 December 1924), Phoque (16
March 1926)
B u i l d e r : Brest
D a u p h i n (2 April 1925), E s p a d o n (28 May
1926)
B u i l d e r : Toulon
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1150 tons (surfaced), 1441
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 256980 x 22950 x 16980
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Sulzer or Schneider diesel
engines, 2 electric motors, 2 shafts. 2900
bhp/1800 shp = 15/9 knots
R a n g e : 7700 nm at 9 knots surfaced, 70 nm
at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 10 x 550mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern, 2 twin trainable external
mount), total 16 torpedoes, 1 x 100mm
gun, 2 x 8mm machine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 51
N o t e s : Jean-Jacques Roquebert was respon-
sible for the design of these double-hull
submarines, intended for long-range op-
erations, cooperation with the battleﬂeet,
and colonial service. In service they suf-
fered from inadequate surface speed and
handling.
The Morse and the Narval were mined
off the Tunisian coast on 16 June and 12
December 1940, and the submarine
Pa r t h i a n torpedoed the S o u f f l e u r o f f
Beirut on 24 June 1941. The C a ï m a n
was scuttled at Toulon on 27 November
1942, salved, and bombed by USAAF air-
craft on 11 March 1944. The P h o q u e,
the R e q u i n, the E s p a d o n, and the
Dauphin were seized at Bizerta on 8 De-
cember 1942 and commissioned by Italy
as the FR-111, the FR-113, the FR-114,
and the FR-115. They were transferred to
Genoa but saw no service, were seized by
Germany on 9 September 1943, and
were scuttled on 15 September. The
M a r s o u i n escaped from Toulon on 27
November 1942 and served with the Free
French forces. It was stricken on 18 Feb-
ruary 1946.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: FRANCE 183

S I R È N E CLASS (1925)

Sirène (6 August 1928), Naïade (20 October
1925), Galatée (18 December 1925),
Nymphe (1 April 1926)
B u i l d e r : Loire
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 609 tons (surfaced), 757
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 2099110 x 17910 x 14910
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Sulzer diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 1300 bhp/1000 shp
= 14/7.5 knots
R a n g e : 3500 nm at 9 knots surfaced, 75 nm
at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 7 x 550mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 1 stern, 1 twin trainable external
mount), total 13 torpedoes, 1 x 75mm
gun, 2 x 8mm machine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 41
N o t e s : Jean Simonot designed these
double-hull boats to a speciﬁcation for a
“6 0 0 - t o n n e” second-class seagoing sub-
marine. They were very maneuverable
but dived slowly and had poor internal
arrangements that made them cramped
and uncomfortable for their crews. They
served primarily in the Mediterranean.
The Nymphe was stricken on 25 June
1941. The N a ï a d e, the S i r è n e, and the
G a l a t é e were scuttled at Toulon on 27
November 1942. They were reﬂoated and
later bombed by USAAF aircraft, the ﬁrst
pair on 24 November 1943 and the last
on 5 July 1944.

A R I A N E CLASS (1925)

A r i a n e (6 August 1925), O n d i n e (8 May
1925), E u r y d i c e (31 May 1927), D a n a é
(11 September 1927)
B u i l d e r : Normand
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 626 tons (surfaced), 787
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 216960 x 20940 x 13960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Normand-Vickers diesel en-
gines, 2 electric motors, 2 shafts. 1250
bhp/1000 shp = 14/7.5 knots
R a n g e : 3500 nm at 9 knots surfaced, 75 nm
at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 7 x 550mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 1 stern, 1 twin trainable external
mount), total 13 torpedoes, 1 x 100mm
gun, 2 x 8mm machine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 41
N o t e s : These Normand-Fenaux boats were
designed to the “6 0 0 - t o n n e”s p e c i f i c a-
tion. They too were very maneuverable
but dived slowly and had poor internal
arrangements that made them cramped
and uncomfortable for their crews. They
served primarily in the Mediterranean.
The Greek steamer A i k a t e r i n i
G o u l o u d r i s accidentally rammed and
sank the Ondine near Vigo on 2 October
1928. The A r i a n e and the Danaé w e r e
scuttled at Oran on 9 November 1942.
The E u r y d i c e was scuttled at Toulon on
27 November, reﬂoated, and bombed by
USAAF aircraft on 5 July 1944.184 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: FRANCE

C I R C É CLASS (1925)

Circé (29 October 1925), Calypso (15 Janu-
ary 1926), T h é t i s (20 June 1927), D o r i s
(25 November 1927)
B u i l d e r : Schneider
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 615 tons (surfaced), 776
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 2049110 x 20940 x 13910
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Schneider diesel engines, 2
electric motors 2 shafts. 1250 bhp/1000
shp = 14/7.5 knots
R a n g e : 3500 nm at 9 knots surfaced, 75 nm
at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 7 x 550mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 1 stern, 1 twin trainable external
mount), total 13 torpedoes, 1 x 75mm
gun, 2 x 8mm machine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 41
N o t e s : These Simonot boats were designed
to the “6 0 0 - t o n n e” specification. They
too were very maneuverable but dived
slowly and had poor internal arrange-
ments that made them cramped and un-
comfortable for their crews. They served
primarily in the Mediterranean.
The U - 9 torpedoed the D o r i s off the
Dutch coast on 8 May 1940. The Thétis
was scuttled at Toulon on 27 November
1942. The Italians seized the Calypso and
the Circé at Bizerta on 8 December
1942. USAAF aircraft bombed the
C a l y p s o on 20 January 1943. The C i r c é
became the F R - 1 1 7 and was scuttled at
Bizerta on 6 May 1943.

[ G R E E C E ] —K AT S O N I S CLASS (1926)

Katsonis (20 March 1926)
B u i l d e r : Gironde
Papamicolis (19 November 1926)
B u i l d e r : Loire
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 595 tons (surfaced), 778
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 204990 x 17960 x 11900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Schneider-Carels diesel en-
gines, 2 electric motors 2 shafts. 1300
bhp/1000 shp = 14/9.5 knots
R a n g e : 3500 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 100
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 550mm torpedo tubes (4
bow, 2 stern), 1 x 100mm gun, 1 x 3-pdr
AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 39
N o t e s : These boats were very similar to the
C i r c é class with a larger conning tower.
They operated within the British
Mediterranean Fleet after the fall of
Greece. The German antisubmarine ves-
sel U j – 2 1 0 1 sank the K a t s o n i s in the
Aegean on 14 September 1943, and the
Papamicolis was discarded in 1945.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: FRANCE 185

[ L AT V I A ] —R O N I S CLASS (1926)

Ronis (1 July 1926)
B u i l d e r : Loire
Spidola (6 October 1926)
B u i l d e r : Normand
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 390 tons (surfaced), 514
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 180950 x 15990 x 119100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Sulzer diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 1300 bhp/700 shp =
14/9 knots
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 450mm torpedo tubes (4
bow, 2 stern) 1 x 75mm AA gun, 2 x 8mm
machine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 27
N o t e s : Simonot designed these small
double-hull submarines. The Soviet
Union took them over in August 1940.
They were blown up at Liepaya on 14
June 1941.

[ G R E E C E ] —P R O T E U S CLASS (1927)

Proteus (24 October 1927), Nereus (Decem-
ber 1927), Triton (4 April 1928)
B u i l d e r : Loire
Glavkos (1928)
B u i l d e r : CNF
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 750 tons (surfaced), 960
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 225900 x 189100 x 13980
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Sulzer diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors 2 shafts. 1420 bhp/1200 shp
= 14/9.5 knots
R a n g e : 3500 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 100
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 550mm torpedo tubes (6
bow, 2 stern), 1 x 100mm gun, 1 x 3-pdr
AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 41
N o t e s : These submarines were enlarge-
ments of the K a t s o n i s class with all
torpedo tubes mounted internally. The
Italian torpedo boat Antares rammed and
sank the P r o t e u s off Valona on 19 De-
cember 1940. The other boats operated
with the British Mediterranean Fleet af-
ter the fall of Greece. The G l a v k o s w a s
bombed at Malta on 4 April 1942; the
German antisubmarine vessel U j – 3 1 0 2
sank the Tr i t o n near Andos on 16 No-
vember; the N e r e u s was discarded in
1945.186 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: FRANCE

FRANCE: R E D O U TA B L E CLASS (1928), S FA X ( 1 9 3 4 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Redoutable (24 February 1928), Vengeur (1
September 1928), P r o m é t h é e (12 A p r i l
1930), L’ E s p o i r e (18 July 1931), A g o s t a
(20 April 1934), B é v é z i e r s (14 October
1935), O u e s s a n t (30 November 1936),
Sidi Ferruch (9 July 1937)
B u i l d e r : Cherbourg
Henri Poincaré (10 April 1929), Poncelet (10
April 1929)
B u i l d e r : Lorient
A r g o (11 April 1929), Phénix (12 A p r i l
1930)
B u i l d e r : Dubigeon
A c t é o n (10 April 1929), A c h é r o n (6 A u g u s t
1929), P é g a s e (28 July 1930), Le Con-
quérant (26 June 1934), Sfax (6 Decem-
ber 1934), Casabianca (2 February 1935)
B u i l d e r : Loire
Fresnel (8 June 1929), Le Glorieux (29 No-
vember 1931)
B u i l d e r : St. Nazaire
M o n g e (25 June 1929), P r o t é e (31 July
1930), Le Tonnant (15 December 1934)
B u i l d e r : La Seyne
Pa s c a l (19 July 1928), Pa s t e u r (19 July
1928), A c h i l l e (28 May 1930), A j a x ( 2 8
May 1930), Le Centaure (14 October
1932), Le Héros (14 October 1932)
B u i l d e r : Brest
A r c h i m è d e (6 September 1930), Persée ( 2 3
May 1931)
B u i l d e r : CNF
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1570 tons (surfaced),
2084 tons (submerged)A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: FRANCE 187

D i m e n s i o n s : 3029100 x 269110 x 15950
M a c h i n e r y : 4 Sulzer or Schneider diesel
engines, 2 electric motors, 2 shafts.
6000-8000 bhp/2000 shp = 17-20/10
knots
R a n g e : 10,000 nm at 10 knots surfaced,
100 nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 9 x 550mm plus 2 x 400mm
torpedo tubes (4 bow, 1 triple trainable
external mount, 1 quadruple trainable ex-
ternal 550mm/400mm mount), total 11 x
550mm plus 2 x 400mm torpedoes, 1 x
100mm gun, 2 x 13.2mm machine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 61
N o t e s : Roquebert designed these large
double-hull, oceangoing, first-class sub-
marines. They were fast, maneuvered
easily, and took about 45 seconds to dive,
but suffered from poor habitability and
stowage for provisions and munitions.
Nevertheless, they were regarded as suc-
cessful vessels. Later boats received more
powerful diesels and were faster on the
surface. This class served primarily in the
Atlantic and Mediterranean.
The Prométhée sank in an accident at
Cherbourg on 8 July 1932, and the
Phénix sank in an accident at Cam Ranh
Bay on 15 June 1939. The A c h i l l e, the
A g o s t a, the O u e s s a n t, and the Pa s t e u r
were scuttled at Brest on 18 June 1940;
aircraft from the carrier Ark Royal s a n k
the Persée at Dakar on 23 September; the
destroyer Fo x h o u n d sank the A j a x o f f
Dakar on 24 September; a British
bomber sank the Po n c e l e t near Po r t -
Gentil on 8 November; the U - 3 7 t o r p e-
doed the S f a x off Cape Juby on 19
D e c e m b e r. British carrier aircraft sank
the B é v e z i e r s and Le Heros off Diego
Suarez on 5 and 7 May 1942; the de-
stroyers A c t i v e and Pa n t h e r sank the
M o n g e off Diego Suarez on 8 May; the
destroyer We s t c o t t sank the A c t é o n o f f
Oran on 8 November 1942; U.S. Navy
aircraft sank the Sidi Fe r r u c h n e a r
Casablanca on 11 November; U.S. Navy
PBYs sank Le Conquérant b e t w e e n
Casablanca and Dakar on 13 November;
Le Tonnant was scuttled off Cadiz on 15
November; the Achéron, the Espoire, the
Fr e s n e l, the Pa s c a l, the R é d o u t a b l e, and
the Ve n g e u r were scuttled at Toulon on
27 November (the Achéron and the Pas-
cal were refloated and later bombed by
USAAF aircraft on 24 November 1943
and 11 March 1944). The Henri Poincaré
was captured at Toulon, became the Ital-
ian F R - 1 1 8, and was scuttled at La
Spezia on 9 September 1943. The Protée
was interned at Alexandria from June
1940 until January 1943, when it joined
the Free French forces. It was mined
near Marseilles on 29 December 1943.
The surviving boats were stricken in
1952.188 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: FRANCE

[ Y U G O S L AV I A ] —O S V E T N I K CLASS (1928)

S m e l i (1 December 1938), O s v e t n i k ( 1 4
January 1929)
B u i l d e r : Loire
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 630 tons (surfaced), 809
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 218920 x 17990 x 12960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2
Nancy electric motors 2shafts. 1480
bhp/1000 shp = 14.5/9.25 knots
R a n g e : 3500 nm at 9 knots surfaced, 75
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 550mm torpedo tubes (4
bow, 2 stern), 1 x 100mm gun, 1 x 40mm
AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 43
N o t e s : These submarines were similar to
the French Circé class. The Italians took
them over in April 1941 and renamed
them the Antonio Baiamonti and the
Francesco Rismondo. The former was
scuttled at La Spezia on 9 September
1943, and the latter at Bonifacio on 18
September.

SAPHIR CLASS (1928)

Saphir (20 December 1928), Turquoise (16
May 1929), Nautilus (21 March 1930),
Rubis (30 September 1931), Diamant (18
May 1933), Perle (30 July 1935)
B u i l d e r : Toulon
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 761 tons (surfaced), 925
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 216920 x 23970 x 14910
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Normand-Vickers diesel en-
gines, 2 electric motors, 2 shafts. 1300
bhp/1000 shp = 12/9 knots
R a n g e : 7000 nm at 7.5 knots surfaced, 80
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 3 x 550mm plus 2 x 400mm
torpedo tubes (2 bow, 1 triple trainable
external 550mm/400mm mount), total 5
x 550mm plus 2 x 400mm torpedoes, 32
mines, 1 x 75mm gun, 2 x 13.2mm ma-
chine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 42
N o t e s : These double-hull minelaying sub-
marines were designed by Normand-
Fenaux and were very successful boats.
They served mainly in the Mediterranean
before World War II.
The D i a m a n t was scuttled at To u l o n
on 27 November 1942. The Italians cap-
tured the Saphir, the Turquoise, and the
Nautilus at Bizerta on 8 December 1942.
The Nautilus was bombed on 31 January
1943, but the other two became the
Italian F R - 1 1 2 and FR-116 and were
scuttled at Naples on 15 September and
Bizerta on 6 May 1943. Allied aircraft
mistakenly sank the Pe r l e in the North
Atlantic on 8 July 1944. The R u b i s, the
most successful minelaying submarine of
the war, served with Free French forces
from June 1940 and survived the war. It
was stricken on 10 April 1949.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: FRANCE 189

[ P O L A N D ] —WILK CLASS (1929)

Wilk (12 April 1929)
B u i l d e r : Normand
Rys (22 April 1929)
B u i l d e r : Loire
Zbik (14 June 1931)
B u i l d e r : CNF
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 980 tons (surfaced), 1250
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 257960 x 19940 x 13990
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Normand-Vickers diesel en-
gines, 2 electric motors, 2 shafts. 1800
bhp/1200 shp = 14/9 knots
R a n g e : 7000 nm at 7.5 knots surfaced, 80
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 550mm torpedo tubes
(4 bow, 1 twin trainable external mount),
total 10 torpedoes, 40 mines, 1 x 100mm
gun, 1 x 40mm AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 54
N o t e s : These submarines were larger ver-
sions of the French Saphir class. The Rys
and the Zbik were interned in Sweden in
September 1939, returned to Poland at
the war’s end, and were scrapped in 1951
and 1954. The Wilk escaped to Britain in
September 1939, became a training ves-
sel a year later, and returned to Po l a n d
after World War II. It was scrapped in
1951.190 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: FRANCE

FRANCE: S U R C O U F (18 OCTOBER 1929)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

B u i l d e r : Cherbourg
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 3250 tons (surfaced),
4304 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 3609100 x 29960 x 239100
M a c h i n e r y : 4 Sulzer diesel engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 7600 bhp/3400
shp = 18.5/10 knots
R a n g e : 10,000 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 70
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 550mm plus 4 x 400mm
torpedo tubes (4 bow, 1 quadruple train-
able external 550mm mount, 1 quadru-
ple trainable external 400mm mount), to-
tal 14 x 550mm plus 8 x 400mm
torpedoes, 1 x twin 80 gun turret, 2 x
37mm AA guns, 2 x twin 13.2mm ma-
chine guns, 1 aircraft
C o m p l e m e n t : 118
N o t e s : Roquebert designed the Surcouf as
a very long range commerce-raiding sub-
marine. It had a double hull, heavy gun
armament and ﬁre control, a hangar for a
scouting aircraft, and a special compart-
ment to accommodate prisoners. The de-
sign was very successful. The S u r c o u f
served with the Free French forces from
June 1940. The U.S. steamer T h o m s o n
Ly k e s accidentally rammed and sank the
Surcouf in the Gulf of Mexico on 18 Feb-
ruary 1942.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: FRANCE 191

A R G O N A U T E CLASS (1929)

A r g o n a u t e (23 May 1929), A r é t h u s e (8 A u-
gust 1929), Atalante (5 August 1930), La
Vestale (25 May 1932), La Sultane (5 Au-
gust 1932)
B u i l d e r : Schneider
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 630 tons (surfaced), 798
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 208900 x 21900 x 139100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Schneider-Carel diesel en-
gines, 2 electric motors, 2 shafts. 1300
bhp/1000 shp = 14/9 knots
R a n g e : 4000 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 85
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 550mm plus 2 x 400mm
torpedo tubes (3 bow, 1 stern, 1 twin
trainable external 550mm mount, 1 twin
trainable external 400mm mount), 1 x
75mm gun, 1 x 13.2mm machine gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 41
N o t e s : S c h n e i d e r-Laubeuf designed these
double-hull boats to a speciﬁcation for a
“630-tonne” second-class seagoing sub-
marine, an enlarged and improved ver-
sion of the “600-tonne” type that cor-
rected the problems of the earlier design.
They were very maneuverable, dived
quickly, and had much improved internal
arrangements that endowed them with
acceptable habitability. They served pri-
marily in the Mediterranean.
The destroyer A c h a t e s sank the A r g-
o n a u t e off Oran on 8 November 1942.
The other boats were stricken in 1946.

D I A N E CLASS (1930)

D i a n e (13 May 1930), M é d u s e (26 A u g u s t
1930), A m p h i t r i t e (20 December 1930),
O r p h é e (10 November 1931), La Psyché
(4 August 1932)
B u i l d e r : Normand
Antiope (19 August 1930), Amazone (28 De-
cember 1931), La Sybille (28 January
1932), Oréade (23 May 1932)
B u i l d e r : Seine-Maritime
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 571 tons (surfaced), 809
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 211940 x 20940 x 14910
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Normand-Vickers diesel en-
gines, 2 electric motors, 2 shafts. 1400
bhp/1000 shp = 14/9 knots
R a n g e : 4000 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 85
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 550mm plus 2 x 400mm
torpedo tubes (3 bow, 1 stern, 1 twin
trainable external 550mm mount, 1 twin
trainable external 400mm mount), 1 x
75mm gun, 1 x 13.2mm machine gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 41
N o t e s : N o r m a n d - Fenaux designed these
double-hull boats to a speciﬁcation for a
“630-tonne” second-class seagoing sub-
marine, an enlarged and improved version
of the “600-tonne” type that corrected the
problems of the earlier design. They were
very maneuverable, dived quickly, and
had much improved internal arrange-
ments that endowed them with accept-
able habitability. They served primarily in
the Mediterranean.
U.S. Navy carrier aircraft sank the
A m p h i t r i t e, the O r é a d e , and La Psyche
near Casablanca on 8 November 1942;
British carrier aircraft sank the D i a n e a t
Oran the next day; the destroyer R o w a n
drove the M é d u s e ashore near Casablanca
on 10 November; La Sybille, after sinking
a transport off Casablanca, was torpedoed
by the U - 1 7 3 on 11 November. The sur-
viving boats were stricken in 1946.192 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: FRANCE

O R I O N CLASS (1931)

Orion (21 April 1931)
B u i l d e r : Loire
Ondine (4 May 1931)
B u i l d e r : Dubigeon
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 558 tons (surfaced), 787
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 219900 x 20940 x 14950
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Sulzer diesel engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 1400 bhp/1000
shp = 14/9 knots
R a n g e : 4000 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 85
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 550mm plus 2 x 400mm
torpedo tubes (3 bow, 1 stern, 1 twin
trainable external 550mm mount, 1 twin
trainable external 400mm mount), 1 x
75mm gun, 1 x 13.2mm machine gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 41
N o t e s : Simonot designed these double-
hull boats to a specification for a “630-
tonne” second-class seagoing submarine,
an enlarged and improved version of the
“600-tonne” type that corrected the prob-
lems of the earlier design. They were very
maneuverable, dived quickly, and had
much improved internal arrangements
that endowed them with acceptable hab-
i t a b i l i t y. They served primarily in the
Mediterranean before World War II. In
June 1940 they escaped to Britain but
did not become operational because of
lack of equipment and were scrapped in
April 1943.

M I N E RV E CLASS (1934)

Iris (23 September 1934)
B u i l d e r : Dubigeon
Minerve (23 October 1934)
B u i l d e r : Cherbourg
V é n u s (6 April 1935), C é r è s (9 December
1938)
B u i l d e r : Seine-Maritime
Junon (15 September 1935), Pallas (25 Au-
gust 1938)
B u i l d e r : Normand
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 662 tons (surfaced), 856
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 223950 x 18950 x 13930
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Normand-Vickers diesel en-
gines, 2 electric motors, 2 shafts. 1800
bhp/1230 shp = 14.5/9 knots
R a n g e : 4000 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 85
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 550mm plus 3 x 400mm
torpedo tubes (4 bow, 2 stern, 1 triple
trainable external 400mm mount), 1 x
75mm gun, 2 x 13.2mm machine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 42
N o t e s : Roquebert designed these double-
hull boats to a specification for a “630-
tonne” second-class seagoing submarine,
an enlarged and improved version of the
“600-tonne” type that corrected the prob-
lems of the earlier design. They were very
maneuverable, dived quickly, and had
much improved internal arrangements
that endowed them with acceptable hab-
i t a b i l i t y. They served primarily in the
Mediterranean.
The C é r è s, the Pa l l a s, and the V é n u s
were scuttled at Toulon on 27 November
1942. The Ju n o n and the M i n e r v e e s-
caped to Britain in June 1940 and served
with the Free French forces, and the Iris
was interned in Spain. The M i n e r v e
wrecked on 19 September 1945 and the
two other boats were stricken in the early
1950s.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY 193

A U R O R E CLASS (1939)

Aurore (26 July 1939)
B u i l d e r : Toulon
La Créole (8 June 1940), L’Artémis (28 July
1942)
B u i l d e r : Normand
La Favorite (5 November 1942), L’Africaine
(7 December 1946)
B u i l d e r : Seine-Maritime
L’ A s t r é e (3 May 1946), L’ A n d r o m è d e ( 1 7
November 1949)
B u i l d e r : Dubigeon
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 893 tons (surfaced), 1170
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 241920 x 21940 x 13990
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Sulzer or Schneider diesel
engines, 2 electric motors, 2 shafts. 3000
bhp/1400 shp = 14.5/9 knots
R a n g e : 5600 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 85
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 9 x 550mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern, 1 triple trainable external
mount), 1 x 100mm gun, 2 x 13.2mm
machine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 44
N o t e s : Pierre Paoli designed these double-
hull submarines as an improved version
of the earlier “630-tonne” type to correct
the remaining problems of the series.
Eight additional boats were canceled or
broken up incomplete.
The Aurore was scuttled at Toulon on
27 November 1942. The Germans com-
pleted La Fa v o r i t e as the U F - 1. It was
bombed at Gotenhafen on 7 July 1944.
The five remaining submarines were
completed after World War II to a revised
design with a streamlined sail, snorkels,
and revised armament. Displacement in-
creased to 870 tons (surfaced) and 1250
tons (submerged); there were two twin
trainable mounts in place of the triple
mount; and an 88mm gun and two
20mm antiaircraft guns replaced the
original artillery. They were scrapped be-
tween 1961 and 1967.

G E R M A N Y
[ S W E D E N ] —VA L E N (5 MAY 1925)

B u i l d e r : Karlskrona
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 548 tons (surfaced), 730
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 187940 x 23940 x 10920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 1340 bhp/700 shp =
14.75/7.5 knots
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 450mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 8 torpedoes, 20 mines, 1 x
75mm AA gun, 1 x 25mm AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 31
N o t e s : The Va l e n essentially was a
minelaying version of the A.G. We s e r –
designed B ä v e r n class. It carried its
mines in ﬁve vertical tubes on each side
within the main ballast tanks using the
Normand-Fenaux system. It was stricken
on 6 October 1944.194 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY

[ S W E D E N ] —DRAKEN CLASS (1926)

Draken (21 October 1926), Gripen (21 Au-
gust 1928), Ulven (6 March 1930)
B u i l d e r : Karlskrona
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 667 tons (surfaced), 850
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 2169100 x 21900 x 109100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Götaverken diesel engines,
2 electric motors, 2 shafts. 1920
bhp/1000 shp = 13.75/8.25 knots
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 8 torpedoes, 1 x 105mm gun,
1 x 25mm AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 35
N o t e s : These submarines were enlarged
versions of the B ä v e r n type. They intro-
duced 533mm torpedoes and a heavy
deck gun into the Swedish submarine
fleet. The U l v e n was mined on 16 A p r i l
1943. The G r i p e n and the D r a k e n w e r e
stricken in 1947–1948.

[ T U R K E Y ] —BIRINCI INÖNÜ C L A S S

Birinci Inönü (1 February 1927), Ikinci In-
önü (12 March 1927)
B u i l d e r : Fijenoord
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 505 tons (surfaced), 620
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 192960 x 19900 x 11960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 1100 bhp/700 shp =
13.5/8.5 knots
R a n g e : 7200 nm at 6 knots surfaced, 55
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 450mm torpedo tubes
(4 bow, 2 stern), 1 x 75mm gun, 1 x
20 mm A A
C o m p l e m e n t : 29
N o t e s : The Ingenieurskantoor voor
Scheepsbouw (IvS) in The Netherlands
developed this design as an update of the
wartime UB-III type. They were dis-
carded in 1950.

[ F I N L A N D ] —V E T E H I N E N CLASS (1930)

Vetehinen (1 June 1930), Vesihiisi (1 August
1930), Iku-Tursu (5 May 1931)
B u i l d e r : Crichton-Vulcan
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 493 tons (surfaced), 716
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 208940 x 20940 x 119100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Polar-Atlas diesel engines, 2
Brown-Boveri electric motors, 2 shafts.
1160 bhp/600 shp = 12.5/8.5 knots
R a n g e : 1500 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 75
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern), total 6 torpedoes, 20
mines, 1 x 76mm gun, 1 x 20mm AA gun,
1 x 12.7mm machine gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 30
N o t e s : The IvS developed the design for
this class as an updated version of the
wartime UC-III type coastal minelayers.
They operated in the Baltic during World
War II and were stricken in 1947.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY 195

[ F I N L A N D ] —S A U K K O (2 JULY 1930)

B u i l d e r : HSK
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 114 tons (surfaced), 142
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 106940 x 13960 x 9960
M a c h i n e r y : 1 Krupp-Germania diesel en-
gine, 1 electric motor, 1 shaft. 170
bhp/120 shp = 7/5.75 knots
R a n g e : 375 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 45 nm
at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 450mm torpedo tubes
(bow), 9 mines, 1 x 12.7mm machine
gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 15
N o t e s : This boat was designed by the IvS
for service on Lake Ladoga. Because it
exceeded the tonnage limits stipulated by
the Treaty of Dorpat, it never served on
the lake and operated in the Baltic. It was
stricken in 1947.

TYPE IA (1930)

U-25 (14 February 1936), U-26 (14 March
1936)
[Turkey]—Gur (22 October 1930)
B u i l d e r : Echovarrieta y Larringa)
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 862 tons (surfaced), 983
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 237960 x 20940 x 13960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2
Brown-Boveri electric motors, 2 shafts.
2800 bhp/780 shp = 20/9 knots
R a n g e : 7900 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 78
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern), total 14 torpedoes, 1 x
105mm (G u r: 100mm) gun, 1 x 20mm
AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 42
N o t e s : The IvS prepared this design for
Spain as its E - 1. Much of its structure
was prefabricated in The Netherlands
and shipped to Spain for assembly. The
new Spanish Republic, established in
1932, declined to accept the boat, and it
was sold to Turkey in 1934, just before
completion. The same design was used
for new oceangoing submarines for the
Kriegsmarine when Germany resumed U-
boat construction.
The corvette Gladiolus and an A u s-
tralian ﬂying boat crippled the U-26 near
Ireland, and it was scuttled on 1 July
1940. The U - 2 5 was mined near Te r-
schelling on 1 August 1940. The Gur was
stricken in 1950.196 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY

G E R M A N Y: TYPE IIA (1921), U - 1 ( 1 9 3 5 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

U-1 (15 June 1935), U-2 (1 July 1935), U-3
(19 July 1935), U-4 (31 July 1935), U-5
(14 August 1935), U-6 (21 August 1935),
B u i l d e r : Kiel
[Finland]—Vesikko (1 August 1931)
B u i l d e r : Crichton-Vulcan
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 254 tons (surfaced), 303
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 134920 x 13950 x 12960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MWM diesel engines, 2
Siemens electric motors, 2 shafts. 700
bhp/300 shp = 13/7 knots
R a n g e : 1600 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 35
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 3 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 5 torpedoes, 1 x 20mm A A
gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 25 (Vesikko: 16)
N o t e s : The prototype for this class was de-
signed by the IvS for Finland and was
based on the UBII type from World
War I. The same design was used for new
coastal submarines when Germany
recommenced U-boat construction.
The German boats operated primarily
in training and trials roles, although they
undertook operational patrols during the
ﬁrst eight months of World War II. The
U - 1 was mined off Terschelling on 8
April 1940; a training accident sank the
U - 5 outside Pillau on 19 March 1943;
the fishing vessel Helmi Söhle a c c i d e n-
tally rammed and sank the U-2 near Pil-
lau on 8 April 1944. The other three
boats decommissioned on 1 A u g u s t
1944.
The Vesikko was stricken in 1947 and
preserved as a memorial.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY 197

[ S W E D E N ] —DELFINEN CLASS (1934)

Delﬁnen (20 December 1934), Nordkaparen
(9 February 1935), S p r i n g a r e n (27 A p r i l
1935)
B u i l d e r : Kockums
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 540 tons (surfaced), 720
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 207900 x 21900 x 11920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2
Brown-Boveri electric motors, 2 shafts.
1200 bhp/800 shp = 15/9 knots
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 533mm torpedo tubes (3
b o w, 1 stern), total 8 torpedoes, 20
mines, 1 x 57mm gun, 1 x 25mm AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 35
N o t e s : These minelayers were designed by
the IvS with the detail design work un-
dertaken in Sweden by B. Swenzén. Five
vertical tubes on each side in the main
ballast tanks carried the mines using the
N o r m a n d - Fenaux system. These sub-
marines were stricken on 24 Fe b r u a r y
1953.

TYPE IIB (1935)

U-7 (28 June 1935), U - 8 (18 July 1935), U - 9
(30 July 1935), U - 1 0 (13 August 1935),
U - 1 1 (27 August 1935), U - 1 2 (11 Sep-
tember 1935), U - 1 3 (9 November 1935),
U - 1 7 (15 November 1935), U - 1 8 (6 De-
cember 1935), U - 1 9 (21 December
1935), U - 1 4 (28 December 1935), U - 2 0
(14 January 1936), U - 1 5 (15 Fe b r u a r y
1936), U - 1 6 (28 April 1936), U - 2 1 ( 1 3
July 1936), U - 2 2 (28 July 1936), U - 2 3 ( 2 8
August 1936), U - 2 4 (24 September 1936)
B u i l d e r : Germania
U - 1 2 0 (16 March 1940), U - 1 2 1 (20 A p r i l
1940)
B u i l d e r : Flenderwerke
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 279 tons (surfaced), 328
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 140900 x 13950 x 12960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MWM diesel engines, 2
Siemens electric motors, 2 shafts. 700
bhp/300 shp = 13/7 knots
R a n g e : 3100 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 43
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 3 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 6 torpedoes, 1 x 20mm A A
gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 25
N o t e s : These submarines were modestly
lengthened versions of the previous Type
IIA boats. They served mainly as training
vessels except in the early months of
World War II, when they undertook oper-
ational patrols. The U - 1 2 was mined in
the English Channel on 5 October 1939,
and the trawler Cayton Wy k e and patrol
vessel P u f ﬁn sank the U - 1 6 there on 25
O c t o b e r. The torpedo boat I l t i s a c c i d e n-
tally rammed and sank the U-15 off He-
ligoland Bight on 30 January 1940; the
U-22 was mined in the North Sea on 23
March; the sloop We s t o n sank the U - 1 3
near Newcastle-upon-Tyne on 31 May. A
training accident sank the U - 7 in the
Baltic on 18 February 1944; the U - 1 9
and the U-20 were scuttled off the Turk-
ish coast in the Black Sea on 10 Septem-
ber; Soviet aircraft sank the U-9 there on
20 September. The surviving boats were
scuttled in port in May 1945.198 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY

[SOVIET UNION]—SERIES IX (1935),
SERIES IXBIS (1936), AND SERIES XVI (1945)

N-1 Voroshilovets (8 August 1935), N - 2
Molotovets (21 December 1935), N - 3
Kalininets (30 April 1936), S-4 (17 Sep-
tember 1936), S-5 (16 October 1936), S-
6 (31 March 1938)
B u i l d e r : Baltic
S-7–S-8 (5 April 1937), S-9–S-11 (20 April
1938), S-12 (20 April 1939), S-15–S-18
(24 April 1940), S-13–S-14 (25 A p r i l
1940), S-19–S-20 (14 March 1941),
S-46–S-48 (1947)
B u i l d e r : Gorkiy
S-101–S-102 (20 April 1938), S-103–S-104
(25 April 1939), S-21 (26 June 1941), S-
22 (7 July 1941), S-23, S-24 (1947)
B u i l d e r : Sudomekh
S-31 (22 February 1939), S-32 (27 A p r i l
1939), S - 3 3 (30 May 1939), S-34 ( 3 0
September 1939), S-35 (1940)
B u i l d e r : Nikolayev
S-54 (5 November 1938), S-50 (1939), S -
55 (27 November 1939), S-56 (25 De-
cember 1939), S-51–S-52 (30 A u g u s t
1940), S-53 (30 October 1941)
B u i l d e r : Dalzavod
S-58 (1945), S-59–S-60 (1946)
B u i l d e r : Severodvinsk
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 840 (Series IXbis and Se-
ries XVI: 856) tons (surfaced), 1070 (Se-
ries IXbis and Series XVI: 1090) tons
(submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 255910 x 21900 x 13930 (Series
IXbis and Series XVI: 13940)
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 4000 bhp/1100 shp =
19.5 (Series IXbis and Series XVI:
18.75)/9 (Series IXbis and Series XVI:
8.75) knots
R a n g e : 9800 nm at 10.5 knots surfaced,
148 nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern), total 12 torpedoes, 1 x
100mm gun, 1 x 45mm AA gun, 1 x
7.62mm machine gun (Series IXbis and
Series XVI)
C o m p l e m e n t : 45
N o t e s : For this class, the IvS modiﬁed its
E - 1 design for Spain to suit Soviet re-
quirements, especially for higher surface
speed that necessitated more powerful
diesel engines and larger machinery
spaces. Deschimag engineers provided
technical assistance during the construc-
tion of the first three boats. The Series
IXbis featured more powerful batteries
and deleted the shield for the 100mm
gun. The Series XVI introduced all-
welded construction in place of riveting,
and also used high-tensile steel, thus in-
creasing their diving depth. Two addi-
tional boats were destroyed on the slip to
prevent their capture by German forces,
and construction of seven other units was
abandoned.
The N-2 was mined off Märket Island
on 3 January 1940. German S-boats sank
the N-3 off Steinort on 24 June 1941 and
the S - 1 0 in Danzig Bight the following
day; the N-1 was blown up at Liepaya on
27 June; the S - 1 1 was mined near
Soelavain Bay on 2 August; the S - 5 w a s
mined off Cape Juminda on 28 A u g u s t ;
German aircraft sank the S-6 off Kassar-
wik on 30 August; the S - 8 was mined
near Suursaari Island on 21 October; the
S - 3 4 was mined in Burgas Bay on 14A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY 199

N o v e m b e r. German aircraft sank the S -
32 south of Feodosiya on 26 June 1942,
and the Finnish submarine Vesehiisi tor-
pedoed the S-7 off Soderarm on 21 Octo-
b e r. German and Finnish antisubmarine
vessels sank the S - 1 2 off Keri on 10
August 1943 and the S-9 off Porkkala on
8 September. The German torpedo boat
T-33 rammed and sank the S-4 in Danzig
Bight on 6 January 1945. The surviving
boats were decommissioned between
1956 and 1962.

TYPE VIIA (1936)

U-33 (11 June 1936), U-34 (17 July 1936),
U-35 (29 September 1936), U-36 (4 No-
vember 1936)
B u i l d e r : Germania
U-27 (24 June 1936), U-28 (14 July 1936),
U-30 (4 August 1936), U-29 (29 August
1936), U-31 (25 September 1936), U-32
(25 February 1937)
B u i l d e r : Bremen
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 626 tons (surfaced), 745
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 211970 x 19900 x 14950
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2
Brown-Boveri electric motors, 2 shafts.
2300 bhp/560 shp = 16/8 knots
R a n g e : 6200 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 94
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 5 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 1 stern), total 11 torpedoes, 1 x
88mm gun, 1 x 20mm AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 44
N o t e s : These boats used an improved ver-
sion of the IvS design for the Finnish
Vetehinen, and were the precursors of the
Kriegsmarine’s most important type of At-
lantic submarine during World War II.
They conducted operational patrols until
the end of 1940, when surviving boats
became training vessels.
The destroyers Fo r e s t e r and Fo r t u n e
sank the U - 2 7 off the Scottish coast on
20 September 1939; the destroyers
I c a r u s, K a s h m i r, and K i n g s t o n sank the U -
3 5 off the Norwegian coast on 29 Novem-
ber; the submarine S a l m o n torpedoed the
U - 3 6 near Kristiansand on 4 December.
The minesweeper G l e a n e r sank the U - 3 3
in the Firth of Clyde on 12 Fe b r u a r y
1940; a British aircraft sank the U - 3 1 i n
the Jade on 11 March; the destroyers
H a r v e s t e r and H i g h l a n d e r sank the U - 3 2
off the Irish coast on 30 October. The
submarine tender L e c h a c c i d e n t a l l y
rammed and sank the U - 3 4 at Memel on
5 August 1943, and an accident sank the
U - 2 8 at Neustadt on 17 March 1944. The
two surviving boats were scuttled on 4
May 1945 at Flensburg.200 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY

[ S W E D E N ] —S J Ö L E J O N E T CLASS (1936)

S j ö l e j o n e t (25 July 1936), S j ö b j ö r n e n ( 1 5
January 1937), Sjöhunden (26 November
1938), Svärdﬁsken (18 May 1940), Tum-
laren (8 September 1940), Sjöhästen (19
October 1940), D y k a r e n (17 December
1940), S j ö o r m e n (5 May 1941), S j ö b o r-
ren (14 June 1941)
B u i l d e r : Kockums
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 580 tons (surfaced), 760
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 210980 x 21900 x 11920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 2100 bhp/1000 shp
= 16.25/10 knots
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes (3
b o w, 1 stern, 1 x twin external training
mount), total 10 torpedoes, 2 x 40mm AA
gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 38
N o t e s : These submarines were very similar
to the Delﬁnen class with minelaying ca-
pability deleted. They were reconstructed
in the 1950s with streamlined sails,
snorkels, and the external tubes and guns
removed. They were stricken between
1959 and 1964.

TYPE VIIB (1938)

U-45 (27 April 1938), U-51 (11 June 1938),
U - 4 6 (10 September 1938), U - 4 7 ( 2 9
October 1938), U - 5 2 (21 December
1938), U - 4 8 (5 March 1939), U - 5 3 ( 6
May 1939), U - 4 9 (24 June 1939), U - 5 4
(15 August 1939), U - 5 5 (11 October
1939), U-50 (1 November 1939), U-100
(13 January 1940), U - 1 0 1 (10 Fe b r u a r y
1940), U - 9 9 (12 March 1940), U - 1 0 2
(21 March 1940)
B u i l d e r : Germania
U - 7 3 (27 July 1940), U - 7 4 (31 A u g u s t
1940), U-76 (9 October 1940), U-75 (18
October 1940)
B u i l d e r : Vegesack
U-83 (9 December 1940), U-84 (26 Febru-
ary 1941), U - 8 5 (10 April 1941), U - 8 6
(16 May 1941), U-87 (21 June 1941)
B u i l d e r : Flenderwerke
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 753 tons (surfaced), 857
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 218920 x 20940 x 15950
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2
Brown-Boveri or AEG electric motors, 2
shafts. 3200 bhp/560 shp = 17.25/8.75
knots
R a n g e : 8700 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 90
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 5 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 1 stern), total 14 torpedoes, 1 x
88mm gun, 1 x 20mm AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 44
N o t e s : These were slightly enlarged ver-
sions of the Type VIIA with greater range
and space for more reload torpedoes.
They undertook operational patrols until
late 1943, when the surviving boats be-
came training vessels. The U-48 was the
most successful U-boat of World War II,
sinking 306,875 tons of shipping.
The destroyers Ingleﬁeld, Intrepid, and
Ivanhoe sank the U-45 off the Irish coast
on 14 October 1939. British and French
antisubmarine vessels sank the U-55 near
the Scilly Isles on 30 January 1940; the
U-54 was mined in the North Sea on 14
February; the destroyer Gurkha sank the
U-53 in the Orkney Islands on 23 Febru-
ary; the U-50 was mined off Terschelling
on 7 April; the destroyers B r a z e n a n d
Fe a r l e s s sank the U - 4 9 near Narvik on
15 April; the destroyer Va n s i t t a r t s a n kA WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY 201

the U-102 in the Bay of Biscay on 1 July.
The U - 4 7 was lost near Rockall on 7
March 1941; the destroyers Va n o c a n d
Wa l k e r sank the U - 9 9 and the U - 1 0 0
south of Iceland on 17 March; the sloop
S c a r b o r o u g h and destroyer Wo l v e r i n e
sank the U - 7 6 in the same area on 5
April. The destroyer Roper sank the U-85
off Cape Hatteras on 14 April 1942; the
destroyers Wishart and Wrestler sank the
U - 7 4 east of Cartagena on 2 May, and
the destroyer Kipling sank the U-75 near
Mersa Matruh on 28 December. A Brit-
ish aircraft sank the U-83 near Cartagena
on 4 March 1943, and the Canadian de-
stroyer St. Croix and corvette S h e d i a c
sank the U-87 the same day off Leixoes.
A U.S. aircraft sank the U-84 in the west-
ern Atlantic on 7 August; the U-86 failed
to return from an Atlantic patrol in No-
vember; the destroyers Tr i p p e a n d
Woolsey sank the U-73 near Oran on 16
December. The four surviving boats were
scuttled in May 1945.

TYPE IX (1938)

U - 3 7 (14 May 1938), U - 3 8 (9 A u g u s t
1938), U-39 (22 September 1938), U-40
(9 November 1938), U - 4 1 (20 January
1939), U - 4 2 (16 February 1939), U - 4 3
(23 May 1939), U-44 (5 August 1939)
B u i l d e r : Bremen
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1032 tons (surfaced),
1153 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 251900 x 21940 x 15950
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2
Siemens electric motors, 2 shafts. 4400
bhp/740 shp = 18.25/7.75 knots
R a n g e : 10,500 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 78
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern), total 22 torpedoes, 1 x
105mm gun, 1 x 37mm AA gun, 1 x
20mm AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 48
N o t e s : The design for these long-range
oceanic boats was developed from the
Type IA to incorporate greater range and
a heavier gun armament. The first two
became training boats in December
1941.
The destroyers Fa u l k n o r, Fi r e d r a k e,
and Fo x h o u n d sank the U - 3 9 n o r t h w e s t
of Ireland on 14 September 1939; the U-
40 was mined in the English Channel on
13 October; the destroyers Ilex and Imo-
g e n sank the U - 4 2 southwest of Ireland
on the same day. The destroyer Antelope
sank the U-41 south of Ireland on 5 Feb-
ruary 1940, and the U-44 was mined off
Terschelling on 13 March. Aircraft from
the escort carrier S a n t e e sank the U - 4 3
near the Azores on 30 July 1943. The two
surviving boats were scuttled in May
1945.202 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY

[ T U R K E Y ] —S A L D I R AY CLASS (1938)

Saldiray (23 July 1938)
B u i l d e r : Germania
A t i l a y (19 May 1939), Yi l d i r a y (23 A u g u s t
1939)
B u i l d e r : Istanbul
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 934 tons (surfaced), 1210
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 262960 x 21900 x 14900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Burmeister and Wain diesel
engines, 2 Brown-Boveri electric motors,
2 shafts. 3500 bhp/1000 shp = 20/9
knots
R a n g e : 13,100 nm at 10 knots surfaced,
75 nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(4 bow, 2 stern), total 14 torpedoes, 1 x
100mm gun, 1 x 20mm AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 44
N o t e s : These boats were designed by the
IvS as enlarged versions of its earlier E-1
for Spain. They were faster thanks to
more powerful machinery and had sub-
stantially greater range. Germania pro-
vided engineers and technicians to sup-
port the construction of the two boats in
Tu r k e y, and their departure when war
came delayed the Yi l d i r a y’s completion.
The A t i l a y was mined outside the Dard-
anelles on 14 July 1942, and the two
other boats were discarded in 1957.

TYPE IIC (1938)

U - 5 6–U - 5 7 (3 September 1938), U - 5 9 ( 1 2
October 1938), U-58 (14 October 1938),
U - 6 0 (1 June 1939), U - 6 1 (15 June
1939), U-62 (16 November 1939), U-63
(6 December 1939)
B u i l d e r : Bremen
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 291 tons (surfaced), 341
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 144900 x 13950 x 12960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MWM diesel engines, 2
Siemens electric motors, 2 shafts. 700
bhp/300 shp = 12/7 knots
R a n g e : 3800 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 42
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 3 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 5 torpedoes, 1 x 20mm A A
gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 25
N o t e s : This type was a developed version
of the previous Type IIB. They became
training vessels from the end of 1940.
The destroyers Escort, Imogen, and In-
gleﬁeld and the submarine Narwhal sank
the U-63 off the Shetland Islands on 25
February 1940, and the rest of the class
were scuttled in May 1945.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY 203

[ T U R K E Y ] —B AT I R AY (28 SEPTEMBER 1938)

B u i l d e r : Germania
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1128 tons (surfaced),
1284 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 284950 x 22930 x 13950
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Burmeister and Wain diesel
engines, 2 Brown-Boveri electric motors,
2 shafts. 4200 bhp/960 shp = 18/8.5
knots
R a n g e : 13,100 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 75
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern), total 14 torpedoes, 1 x
105mm gun, 2 x 20mm AA guns, 40
mines.
C o m p l e m e n t : 45
N o t e s : The IvS designed the B a t i r a y as a
minelaying version of its A t i l a y type for
Turkey with five vertical mine tubes on
each side in the main ballast tanks. It still
was running trials when war broke out
and it was taken over by Germany. The
mine tubes were converted to fuel tanks
and the boat commissioned as the UA on
12 September 1939. After operating in
the Atlantic it became a training boat in
August 1942 and was scuttled at Kiel on
2 May 1945.

TYPE IXB (1939)

U - 6 4 (20 September 1939), U - 6 5 (6 No-
vember 1939), U - 1 2 2 (30 December
1939), U-123 (2 March 1940), U-124 (9
March 1940), U-103 (12 April 1940), U-
1 0 4 (25 May 1940), U - 1 0 5 (15 June
1940), U-106 (17 June 1940), U-107 (2
July 1940), U-108 (15 July 1940), U-110
(25 August 1940), U - 1 1 1 (6 September
1940), U-109 (14 September 1940)
B u i l d e r : Bremen
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1051 tons (surfaced),
1178 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 251900 x 22940 x 15950
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2
Siemens electric motors, 2 shafts. 4400
bhp/740 shp = 18.25/7.25 knots
R a n g e : 12,000 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 64
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern), total 22 torpedoes, 1 x
105mm gun, 1 x 37mm AA gun, 1 x
20mm AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 48
N o t e s : This class had slightly greater range
than the previous Type IX.
An aircraft from the battleship Wa r-
spite sank the U-64 off Narvik on 13 April
1940; the U-122 failed to return from a
patrol in June, as did the U - 1 0 4 in No-
v e m b e r. The destroyer D o u g l a s sank the
U - 6 4 southeast of Iceland on 28 A p r i l
1941; the destroyers Broadway and Bull-
d o g and the corvette Au b r e t i a c a p t u r e d
the U-110 south of Iceland on 9 May and
sank it the next day, and the trawler Lady
S h i r l e y sank the U - 1 1 1 southwest of
Tenerife on 4 October. The sloop B l a c k
S w a n and the corvette S t o n e c r o p s a n k
the U-124 off Oporto on 2 April 1943; a
British aircraft sank the U - 1 0 9 south of
Ireland on 4 May; a French aircraft sank
the U-105 off Dakar on 2 June, and Aus-
tralian and British aircraft sank the U -
1 0 6 in the Bay of Biscay on 2 A u g u s t .
The U-108 was bombed at Stettin on 11
April 1944, and British aircraft sank the
U-107 in the Bay of Biscay on 18 August.
The U - 1 0 3 was bombed at Kiel on 15
April 1945.
The U-123 was scuttled at Lorient on
19 August 1944. It was raised, became
the French B l a i s o n, and was decommis-
sioned on 18 August 1959.204 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY

TYPE IID (1940)

U - 1 3 7 (18 May 1940), U - 1 3 8 (18 May
1940), U-139 (28 June 1940), U-140 (28
June 1940), U - 1 4 1 (27 July 1940), U -
1 4 2 (27 July 1940), U - 1 4 3 (10 A u g u s t
1940), U - 1 4 4 (24 August 1940), U - 1 4 5
(21 September 1940), U - 1 4 6 (21 Sep-
tember 1940), U-149 (19 October 1940),
U - 1 5 0 (19 October 1940), U - 1 4 7 ( 1 6
November 1940), U - 1 4 8 (16 November
1940), U - 1 5 1 (14 December 1940), U -
152 (14 December 1940)
B u i l d e r : Kiel
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 314 tons (surfaced), 364
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 144940 x 16900 x 12990
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MWM diesel engines, 2
Siemens electric motors, 2 shafts. 700
bhp/300 shp = 13/7 knots
R a n g e : 5650 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 56
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 3 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 5 torpedoes, 1 x 20mm A A
gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 25
N o t e s : These final conventional coastal
boats operated mainly as training
submarines.
The corvette Pe r i w i n k l e and the
destroyer Wa n d e r e r sank the U - 1 4 7
northwest of Ireland on 2 June 1941; the
destroyers Fa u l k n o r, Fe a r l e s s, Fo r e s i g h t,
Fo r e s t e r, and Foxhound sank the U - 1 3 8
off Cadiz on 18 June, and the Russian
submarine S c h c – 3 0 7 torpedoed the U -
144 in the Gulf of Finland on 10 August.
The surviving boats were scuttled or sur-
rendered at the end of World War II.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY 205

G E R M A N Y: TYPE VIIC (1940), U - 2 5 1 ( 1 9 4 1 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

U-93 (8 June 1940), U-94 (12 June 1940),
U - 9 5 (18 July 1940), U - 9 6 (1 A u g u s t
1940), U-97 (15 August 1940), U-98 (31
August 1940), U - 6 9 (19 September
1940), U - 7 0 (12 October 1940), U - 7 1
(31 October 1940), U-72 (22 November
1940), U - 2 0 1 (7 December 1940), U -
203 (4 January 1941), U-204 (23 January
1941), U-202 (10 February 1941), U-205
(20 March 1941), U-206 (4 April 1941),
U - 2 0 7 (24 April 1941), U - 2 0 8 (21 May
1941), U - 2 0 9 (28 August 1941), U - 2 1 0
(23 December 1941), U-211 (15 January
1942), U - 2 1 2 (11 March 1942), U - 2 2 1
(14 March 1942), U - 2 2 2 (28 March
1942), U-223 (16 April 1942), U-224 (7
May 1942), U - 2 2 5 (28 May 1942), U -
2 2 6 (18 June 1942), U - 2 2 7 (9 July
1942), U-228 (30 July 1942), U-229 (20
August 1942), U - 2 3 0 (10 September
1942), U - 2 3 1 (1 October 1942), U - 2 3 2
(15 October 1942), U-235 (4 November
1942), U - 2 3 6 (24 November 1942), U -
237 (17 December 1942), U-238 (7 Jan-
uary 1943), U-239 (28 January 1943), U-
240 (18 February 1943), U-241 (25 June
1943), U - 2 4 2 (20 July 1943), U - 2 4 3–
U - 2 4 4 (2 September 1943), U - 2 4 7 ( 2 3
September 1943), U - 2 4 8 (7 October
1943), U-249 (23 October 1943), U-250
(11 November 1943), U-245 (25 Novem-
ber 1943), U-246 (7 December 1943), U-
1 0 5 2 (16 December 1943), U - 1 0 5 3 ( 1 7
January 1944), U - 1 0 5 1 (3 Fe b r u a r y
1944), U - 1 0 5 4 (24 February 1944), U -
1 0 5 5 (9 March 1944), U - 1 0 5 6 ( 3 0
March 1944), U - 1 0 5 8 (11 April 1944),
U-1057 (20 April 1944)
B u i l d e r : Germania206 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY

U-551–U-552 (14 September 1940), U-553
(7 November 1940), U-554 (7 November
1940), U - 5 5 5–U - 5 5 6 (7 December
1940), U - 5 5 7 (22 December 1940), U -
558 (23 December 1940), U-559 (8 Jan-
uary 1941), U-560 (10 January 1941), U-
5 6 1 (23 January 1941), U - 5 6 2 ( 2 4
January 1941), U-563 (5 February 1941),
U-564 (7 February 1041), U-565–U-566
(20 February 1941), U - 5 6 7–U - 5 6 8 ( 6
March 1941), U - 5 6 9–U - 5 7 0 (20 March
1941), U - 5 7 1 (4 April 1941), U - 5 7 2 ( 5
April 1941), U - 5 7 3 (17 April 1941), U -
5 7 4 (18 April 1941), U - 5 7 5 – U - 5 7 6 ( 3 0
April 1941), U - 5 7 7–U - 5 7 8 (15 May
1941), U-579–U-580 (28 May 1941), U-
5 8 1–U - 5 8 2 (12 June 1941), U - 5 8 3 ( 2 6
June 1941), U - 5 8 4 (28 June 1941), U -
585 (9 July 1941), U-586 (10 July 1941),
U - 5 8 7–U - 5 8 8 (23 July 1941), U - 5 8 9–
U - 5 9 0 (6 August 1941), U - 5 9 1–U - 5 9 2
(20 August 1941), U-593–U-594 (3 Sep-
tember 1941), U - 5 9 5–U - 5 9 6 (17 Sep-
tember 1941), U-598 (2 October 1941),
U - 5 9 7 (11 October 1941), U - 5 9 9 ( 1 5
October 1941), U - 6 0 0 (16 October
1941), U-601 (29 October 1941), U-602
(30 October 1941), U - 6 0 3–U - 6 0 4 ( 1 6
November 1941), U-605–U-606 (27 No-
vember 1941), U - 6 0 7–U - 6 0 8 (11 De-
cember 1941), U - 6 0 9 (23 December
1941), U - 6 1 0 (24 December 1941), U -
611 (8 January 1942), U-612 (9 January
1942), U-613–U-614 (29 January 1942),
U-615–U-616 (8 February 1942), U-617
(19 February 1942), U - 6 1 8–U - 6 1 9 ( 9
March 1942), U-620 (9 March 1942), U-
6 2 1–U - 6 2 2 (29 March 1942), U - 6 2 3–
U - 6 2 4 (31 March 1942), U - 6 2 5–U - 6 2 6
(15 April 1942), U-627–U-628 (29 April
1942), U-629–U-630 (12 May 1942), U-
6 3 1–U - 6 3 2 (27 May 1942), U - 6 3 3–
U - 6 3 4 (10 June 1942), U - 6 3 5 (24 June
1942), U-636 (25 June 1942), U-637 (7
July 1942), U - 6 3 8 (8 July 1942), U - 6 3 9
(22 July 1943), U-640 (23 July 1942), U-
6 4 1–U - 6 4 2 (6 August 1942), U - 6 4 3–
U - 6 4 4 (20 August 1942), U - 6 4 5–U - 6 4 6
(3 September 1942), U - 6 4 7–U - 6 4 8
(16 September 1942), U - 6 4 9 (30 Sep-
tember 1942), U-650 (11 October 1942),
U - 9 5 1–U - 9 5 2 (14 October 1942),
U-953–U-954 (28 October 1942), U-955
(13 November 1942), U - 9 5 6 ( 1 4
November 1942), U-957–U-958 (21 No-
vember 1942), U-959–U-960 (3 Decem-
ber 1942), U - 9 6 1–U-962 (17 December
1942), U - 9 6 3–U - 9 6 4 (30 December
1942), U-965–U-966 (14 January 1943),
U - 9 6 7–U - 9 6 8 (28 January 1943), U -
9 6 9–U - 9 7 0 (11 February 1943), U -
9 7 1–U - 9 7 2 (22 February 1943), U - 9 7 3
(10 March 1943), U - 9 7 4 (11 March
1943), U - 9 7 5 (24 March 1943), U - 9 7 6
(25 March 1943), U - 9 7 7 (31 March
1943), U-978 (1 April 1943), U-984 (12
April 1943), U - 9 7 9–U - 9 8 0 (15 A p r i l
1943), U-981–U-982 (29 April 1943), U-
9 8 3 (13 May 1943), U - 9 8 5–U - 9 8 6 ( 2 0
May 1943), U-987 (2 June 1943), U-988
(3 June 1943), U - 9 8 9–U - 9 9 0 (16 June
1943), U-991–U-992 (24 June 1943), U-
993 (5 July 1943), U-994 (6 July 1943)
B u i l d e r : Blohm und Voss
U-751 (16 November 1940), U - 7 5 2 ( 2 9
March 1941), U-753 (26 April 1941), U-
7 5 4 (5 July 1941), U - 7 5 5 (23 A u g u s t
1941), U-756 (18 October 1941), U-757
(14 December 1941), U - 7 5 8 (1 March
1942), U-759 (30 May 1942), U-760 (21
June 1942), U - 7 6 1 (26 September
1942), U - 7 6 2 (21 November 1942), U -
7 6 3 (16 January 1943), U - 7 6 4 ( 1 3
March 1943), U-765 (22 April 1943), U-
7 6 6 (29 May 1943), U - 7 6 7 (10 July
1943), U - 7 6 8 (22 August 1943), U - 7 7 1
(26 September 1943), U - 7 7 2 (31 Octo-
ber 1943), U - 7 7 3 (8 December 1942),A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY 207

U - 7 7 4 (23 December 1943), U - 7 7 5 ( 1 1
February 1944), U-776 (4 March 1944),
U-777 (25 March 1944), U-778 (6 May
1944), U-779 (17 June 1944)
B u i l d e r : Wilhelmshaven
U-77 (23 November 1940), U-78 (7 Decem-
ber 1940), U-79 (25 January 1941), U-80
(11 February 1941), U - 8 1 (22 Fe b r u a r y
1941), U - 8 2 (15 March 1941), U - 1 3 2
(10 April 1941), U-133 (28 April 1941),
U - 1 3 4 (17 May 1941), U - 1 3 5 (12 June
1941), U - 1 3 6 (5 July 1941), U - 2 5 1 ( 2 6
July 1941), U-252 (14 August 1941), U-
2 5 3 (30 August 1941), U - 2 5 4 (20 Sep-
tember 1941), U-255 (8 October 1941),
U - 2 5 6 (28 October 1941), U - 2 5 7 ( 1 9
November 1941), U - 2 5 8 (13 December
1941), U - 2 5 9 (30 December 1941), U -
260 (9 February 1942), U-261 (16 Febru-
ary 1942), U - 2 6 2 (10 March 1942), U -
2 6 3 (18 March 1942), U - 2 6 4 (2 A p r i l
1942), U-265 (23 April 1942), U-266 (11
May 1942), U - 2 6 7 (23 May 1942), U -
2 6 8 (9 June 1942), U - 2 6 9 (24 June
1942), U-270 (11 July 1942), U-271 (29
July 1942), U-272 (15 August 1942), U-
273 (2 September 1942), U-274 (19 Sep-
tember 1942), U-275 (8 October 1942),
U-276 (24 October 1942), U-277 (7 No-
vember 1942), U - 2 7 8 (2 December
1942), U - 2 7 9 (16 December 1942), U -
280 (4 January 1943), U-281 (16 January
1943), U-282 (8 February 1943), U-283
(17 February 1943), U - 2 8 4 (6 March
1943), U-285 (3 April 1943), U-288 (15
April 1943), U - 2 8 6 (21 April 1943), U -
2 8 9 (29 May 1943), U - 2 9 0 (16 June
1943), U-291 (30 June 1943), U-287 (13
August 1943)
B u i l d e r : Vegesack
U-401 (16 December 1940), U-402 (28 De-
cember 1940), U - 4 0 3 (26 Fe b r u a r y
1941), U - 4 0 4 (6 April 1941), U - 4 0 5 ( 4
June 1941), U - 4 0 6 (16 June 1941), U -
4 0 8 (16 July 1941), U - 4 0 7 (16 A u g u s t
1941), U - 4 0 9 (23 September 1941), U -
4 1 0 (14 October 1941), U - 4 1 1 (15 No-
vember 1941), U - 4 1 2 (15 December
1941), U-413 (15 January 1942), U-414
(25 March 1942), U-415–U-416 (9 May
1942), U-417 (6 June 1942), U-418 (11
July 1942), U-420 (12 August 1942), U-
4 1 9 (22 August 1942), U - 4 2 1 (24 Sep-
tember 1942), U-422 (10 October 1942),
U - 4 2 3 (7 November 1942), U - 4 2 4 ( 2 8
November 1942), U - 4 2 5 (19 December
1942), U-426–U-427 (6 February 1943),
U - 4 2 8 (11 March 1943), U - 4 2 9 ( 3 0
March 1943), U-430 (22 April 1943), U-
1 1 6 1 (8 May 1943), U - 1 1 6 2 (29 May
1943),
B u i l d e r : Danziger
U - 3 3 1 (20 December 1940), U - 3 3 2 ( 2 0
March 1941), U-333 (14 June 1941), U-
334 (15 August 1941), U-335 (15 Octo-
ber 1941), U-336 (1 December 1941), U-
3 3 7 (25 March 1942), U - 3 3 8 (20 A p r i l
1942), U - 3 3 9 (30 June 1942), U - 3 4 0
(20 August 1942), U - 3 4 1 (10 October
1942), U - 3 4 2 (10 November 1942), U -
3 4 3 (21 December 1942), U - 3 4 4 ( 2 9
January 1943), U-345 (11 March 1943),
U - 3 4 6 (13 April 1943), U - 3 4 7 (24 May
1943), U-348 (25 June 1943), U-349 (22
July 1943), U - 1 1 0 1 (13 September
1943), U - 1 1 0 3 (12 October 1943), U -
1 1 0 4 (7 December 1943), U - 1 1 0 2 ( 1 5
January 1944), U - 1 1 0 5 (20 April 1944),
U-1106 (26 May 1944), U-1109 (19 June
1944), U - 1 1 0 7 (30 June 1944), U - 1 1 1 0
(21 July 1944), U - 1 1 0 8 (6 September
1944)
B u i l d e r : Nordseewerke
U-651 (21 December 1940), U-652 (7 Feb-
ruary 1941), U-653 (31 March 1941), U-
654 (3 May 1941), U-655 (5 June 1941),
U - 6 5 6 (6 July 1941), U - 6 5 7 (12 A u g u s t
1941), U - 6 5 8 (11 September 1941),208 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY

U - 6 5 9 (14 October 1941), U - 6 6 0 ( 1 7
November 1941), U - 6 6 1 (11 December
1941), U-662 (22 January 1942), U-663
(26 March 1942), U - 6 6 4 (28 A p r i l
1942), U-665 (9 June 1942), U-666 (18
July 1942), U - 6 6 7 (29 August 1942),
U - 6 6 8–U - 6 6 9 (5 October 1942),
U - 6 7 0–U-671 (15 December 1942), U -
672–U-673 (27 February 1943), U-674–
U-675 (8 May 1943), U - 6 7 6–U - 6 7 7 ( 6
July 1943), U-678–U-679 (18 September
1943), U - 6 8 0–U - 6 8 1 (20 November
1943), U-682–U-683 (7 March 1944)
B u i l d e r : Hamburg
U-371 (27 January 1941), U-372 (8 March
1941), U-373 (5 April 1941), U-374 (10
May 1941), U-375 (7 June 1941), U-376
(10 July 1941), U-377 (12 August 1941),
U-378 (13 September 1941), U-379 (16
October 1941), U - 3 8 0 (15 November
1941), U-381 (14 January 1942), U-382
(21 March 1942), U - 3 8 3 (22 A p r i l
1942), U-384 (28 May 1942), U-385 (8
July 1942), U-386 (19 August 1942), U-
3 8 7 (1 October 1942), U - 3 8 8 (12 No-
vember 1942), U - 3 8 9 (11 December
1942), U-390 (23 January 1943), U-391
(5 March 1943), U-392 (10 April 1943),
U - 3 9 3 (15 May 1943), U - 3 9 4 (19 June
1943), U - 3 9 6 (27 August 1943), U - 3 9 7
(6 October 1943), U - 3 9 8 (6 November
1943), U - 3 9 9 (4 December 1943), U -
4 0 0 (8 January 1944), U - 1 1 3 1 (3 A p r i l
1944), U-1132 (29 April 1944)
B u i l d e r : Howaldtswerke
U - 4 3 1 (2 February 1941), U - 4 3 2 (3 Fe b r u-
ary 1941), U - 4 3 3 (15 March 1941), U -
4 3 4 (1 April 1941), U-435 (31 May
1941), U - 4 3 7 (15 June 1941), U - 4 3 6 ( 2 1
June 1941), U - 4 3 8 (July 1941), U -
4 3 9–U - 4 4 0 (10 August 1941), U - 4 4 1 ( 1 3
December 1941), U - 4 4 4 (1 January
1942), U - 4 4 2 (12 January 1942), U - 4 4 3
(31 January 1942), U - 4 4 5 (1 Fe b r u a r y
1942), U - 4 4 6 (11 April 1942), U - 4 4 7 ( 3 0
April 1942), U - 4 4 8 (10 May 1942), U -
4 4 9 (13 June 1942), U - 4 5 0 (4 July 1942),
U - 7 3 1 (25 July 1942), U - 7 3 2 (25 A u g u s t
1942), U - 7 3 3 (5 September 1942), U -
7 3 4 (19 September 1942), U - 7 3 5 (10 Oc-
tober 1942), U - 7 3 6 (31 October 1942),
U - 7 3 7 (21 November 1942), U - 7 3 8 ( 1 2
December 1942), U - 7 3 9–U - 7 4 0 (23 De-
cember 1942), U - 7 4 1–U - 7 4 2 (4 Fe b r u a r y
1943), U-743–U - 7 4 4 (11 March 1943),
U - 7 4 5–U - 7 4 6 (16 April 1943), U - 7 4 7–U -
7 4 8 (13 May 1943), U - 7 4 9 (1 June
1943), U - 7 5 0 (10 June 1943), U - 1 1 9 1 ( 6
July 1943), U - 1 1 9 2 (16 July 1943), U -
1 1 9 3–U - 1 1 9 4 (5 August 1943), U -
1 1 9 5–U - 1 1 9 6 (2 September 1943), U -
1 1 9 7–U - 1 1 9 8 (30 September 1943),
U - 1 1 9 9 (12 October 1943), U - 1 2 0 0 –U -
1 2 0 1 (4 November 1943), U - 1 2 0 2 ( 1 1
November 1943), U - 1 2 0 3–U - 1 2 0 4 ( 9
December 1943), U - 1 2 0 5–U - 1 2 0 6 ( 3 0
December 1943), U - 1 2 0 7 (6 January
1944), U - 1 2 0 8 (13 January 1044), U -
1 2 0 9–U - 1 2 1 0 (9 February 1944), U - 8 2 5
(27 February 1944), U - 8 2 6–U - 8 2 7 ( 9
March 1944), U - 8 2 8 (16 March 1944)
B u i l d e r : Schichau
U - 4 5 1 (5 March 1941), U - 4 5 2 (29 March
1941), U-453–U-454 (30 April 1941), U-
4 5 5–U - 4 5 6 (21 June 1941), U - 4 5 7–U -
458 (4 October 1941), U-465–U-466 (30
March 1942), U - 4 6 7–U - 4 6 8 (16 May
1942), U - 4 6 9–U - 4 7 0 (8 August 1942),
U - 4 7 1–U - 4 7 2 (6 March 1943), U -
4 7 3 – U - 4 7 4 (17 April 1943), U - 4 7 5 ( 2 8
May 1943), U-476 (5 June 1943), U-477
(3 July 1943), U-478 (17 July 1943), U-
479–U-480 (14 August 1943), U-481 (25
September 1943), U-482 (28 September
1943), U-483 (30 October 1943), U-484
(20 November 1943), U-485 (15 January
1944), U-486 (12 February 1944)
B u i l d e r : KielA WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY 209

U - 3 5 1 (27 March 1941), U - 3 5 2 (7 May
1941), U - 3 5 5 (5 July 1941), U - 3 5 6 ( 1 6
September 1941), U - 3 5 3 (11 November
1941), U - 3 5 4 (6 January 1942), U - 3 5 7
(31 March 1942), U - 3 5 8 (21 A p r i l
1942), U-359 (11 June 1942), U-360 (28
July 1942), U - 3 6 1 (9 September 1942),
U - 3 6 2 (21 October 1942), U - 3 6 3 ( 1 7
December 1942), U - 3 6 4 (21 January
1943), U - 3 6 5 (9 March 1943), U - 3 6 6
(16 April 1943), U - 3 6 7 (11 June 1943),
U-350 (17 August 1943), U-369 (17 Au-
gust 1943), U-370 (24 September 1943),
U-368 (16 November 1943)
B u i l d e r : Flensburger
U-701 (16 April 1941), U - 7 0 2 (24 May
1941), U-703 (16 July 1941), U-704 (29
August 1941), U-705 (23 October 1941),
U - 7 0 6 (24 November 1941), U - 7 0 7 ( 1 8
December 1941), U - 7 0 8 (24 March
1942), U-709 (14 April 1942), U-710 (11
May 1942), U - 7 1 1 (25 June 1942), U -
7 1 2 (10 August 1942), U - 7 1 3 (23 Sep-
tember 1942), U - 7 1 4 (12 November
1942), U - 7 1 5 (14 December 1942), U -
7 1 6 (15 January 1943), U - 7 1 7 (19 Fe b-
ruary 1943), U-718 (26 March 1943), U-
7 1 9 (28 April 1943), U - 7 2 0 (5 June
1943), U-721 (22 July 1943), U-722 (18
September 1943), U - 9 0 5 (20 November
1943), U - 9 0 7 (1 March 1944), U - 9 0 6
(28 June 1944)
B u i l d e r : Stülcken
U-88 (16 August 1941), U-89 (20 Septem-
ber 1941), U - 9 0 (25 October 1941), U -
91 (30 November 1941), U-92 (10 Janu-
ary 1942), U - 3 0 1 (25 March 1942),
U - 3 0 2 (25 April 1942), U - 3 0 3 (16 May
1942), U-304 (13 June 1942), U-305 (25
July 1942), U-306 (29 August 1942), U-
3 0 7 (30 September 1942), U-308 ( 3 1
October 1942), U - 3 0 9 (14 December
1942), U - 3 1 0 (31 December 1942), U -
311 (1 February 1943), U-312 (27 Febru-
ary 1943), U - 3 1 3 (27 March 1943), U -
3 1 4 (17 April 1943), U - 3 1 5 (29 May
1943), U-316 (19 June 1943), U-903 (17
July 1943), U - 9 0 4 (7 August 1943), U -
317 (1 September 1943)
B u i l d e r : Flenderwerke
U - 9 2 1 (3 April 1943), U - 9 2 2 (1 June 1943),
U - 9 2 3 (7 August 1943), U - 9 2 4 (25 Sep-
tember 1943), U - 9 2 5 (6 November
1943), U - 9 2 6 (28 December 1943), U -
9 2 8 (15 April 1944), U - 9 2 7 (3 May 1944)
B u i l d e r : Neptun
U - 8 2 1 (26 June 1943), U - 9 0 1 (9 October
1943), U-822 (20 February 1944)
B u i l d e r : Vulcan
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 769 tons (surfaced), 871
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 220920 x 20940 x 15990
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2 AEG
electric motors, 2 shafts. 3200 bhp/560
shp = 17/7.5 knots
R a n g e : 8500 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 80
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 5 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 1 stern), total 14 torpedoes, 1 x
88mm gun, 1 x 20mm AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 44
N o t e s : The Type VIIC was the backbone of
the German submarine force during
operations in the Atlantic and Mediter-
ranean from 1940 onward. It was a fur-
ther improvement on the basic Type VII
design. Many received much heavier an-
tiaircraft batteries, usually twin or
quadruple 20mm mounts, after Dönitz
made the decision to have U-boats ﬁg h t
their way past aircraft on the surface.
They also received radar warning re-
ceivers and other electronic upgrades as
the war continued.210 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY

This class suffered appalling casual-
ties. Twenty-one boats were lost in 1941,
two (the U - 5 8 0 and the U - 5 8 3) in acci-
dents and one (the U - 5 7 0) captured by
the British and commissioned into the
Royal Navy as the G r a p h. Sixty-one be-
came casualties during 1942 and one,
the U-573, was interned in Spain and be-
came the Spanish G-7, remaining in ser-
vice until 1970. During 1943 another
114 boats were lost, seven of them (the
U-284, the U-649, the U-659, the U-670,
the U-718, the U-768, and the U-983) in
accidents. Casualties in 1944 were even
h i g h e r, with 153 boats lost, only three
(the U - 6 7 3, the U - 7 3 7, and the U - 7 3 8)
as a result of accidents. Finally, 57 boats
were lost in 1945, two (the U-1053 and
the U-1206) in accidents. More than half
the 106 boats that survived until May
1945 were scuttled by their crews to pre-
vent their seizure by Allied forces. Virtu-
ally all the others were destroyed by the
Allies, although one, the U - 9 7 7, fled to
Argentina, where it was interned before
being handed over to U.S. forces. In to-
tal, Allied antisubmarine forces sank no
fewer than 370 of the 492 boats of this
class that commissioned during Wo r l d
War II.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY 211

G E R M A N Y: TYPE I X C (1940)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

U-66 (10 October 1940), U-67 (30 October
1940), U-68 (22 November 1940), U-125
(10 December 1940), U-126 (31 Decem-
ber 1940), U - 1 2 7 (4 February 1941),
U - 1 2 8 (20 February 1941), U - 1 2 9 ( 2 8
February 1941), U-130 (14 March 1941),
U - 1 3 1 (1 April 1941), U - 1 5 3 (5 A p r i l
1941), U-154 (21 April 1941), U-155 (12
May 1941), U - 1 5 6 (21 May 1941),
U - 1 5 7 (5 June 1941), U - 1 5 8 (21 June
1941), U-159 (1 July 1941), U - 1 6 0 ( 1 2
July 1941), U-171 (22 July 1941), U-172
(5 August 1941), U - 1 7 3 (11 A u g u s t
1941), U - 1 7 4 (21 August 1941), U - 1 7 5
(2 September 1941), U-176 (12 Septem-
ber 1941)
B u i l d e r : Bremen
U - 5 0 1 (25 January 1941), U - 5 0 2 (18 Fe b r u-
ary 1941), U - 5 0 3 (5 April 1941), U - 5 0 4
(24 April 1941), U - 5 0 5 (24 May 1941), U -
5 0 6 (20 June 1941), U - 5 0 7 (15 July
1941), U - 5 0 8 (30 July 1941), U - 5 0 9 ( 1 9
August 1941), U - 5 1 0 (4 September 1941),
U - 5 1 1 (22 September 1941), U - 5 1 2
(9 October 1941), U - 5 1 3 (29 October
1941), U - 5 1 4 (18 November 1941), U -
5 1 5 (2 December 1941), U - 5 1 6 (16 De-
cember 1941), U - 5 1 7 (30 December
1941), U - 5 1 8 (11 February 1942), U - 5 1 9
(12 February 1942), U - 5 2 0 (2 March
1942), U - 5 2 1 (17 March 1942), U - 5 2 2 ( 1
April 1942), U - 5 2 3 (15 April 1942), U - 5 2 4
(30 April 1942), U - 5 2 5 (20 May 1942)
B u i l d e r : Deutschewerft212 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY

U - 1 6 1–U - 1 6 2 (1 March 1941), U - 1 6 3–
U-164 (1 May 1941), U-165 (15 August
1941), U-166 (1 November 1941)
B u i l d e r : Seebeckwerft
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1120 tons (surfaced),
1232 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 252900 x 22940 x 15950
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 4400 bhp/740 shp =
18.25/7.25 knots
R a n g e : 13,450 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 63
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern), total 22 torpedoes, 1 x
105mm gun, 1 x 37mm AA gun, 1 x
20mm AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 48
N o t e s : These boats were slightly larger
than the previous Type IXB group and
had enhanced range and antiaircraft
batteries.
The Canadian corvettes Chambly and
M o o s e j a w sank the U - 5 0 1 in the Den-
mark Straits on 10 September 1941; the
Australian destroyer Nestor sank the U -
1 2 7 near Gibraltar on 15 December;
antisubmarine vessels and aircraft sank
the U-131 off Madeira on 17 December.
Aircraft sank the U - 5 0 3 and the U -
520 off Newfoundland on 15  March and
30 October 1942, the U - 1 5 8 n e a r
Bermuda on 30 June, the U-502 and the
U-165 in the Bay of Biscay on 5 July and
27 September, the U-512 off Cayenne on
2 October, and the U - 5 1 7 southwest of
Ireland on 21 November. The cutter
Thetis sank the U-157 off Havana on 13
June, the PC-566 sank the U-166 in the
Gulf of Mexico on 1 August; the U - 1 7 1
was mined near Lorient on 8 October;
the destroyers Q u i c k, S w a n s o n, and
Woolsey sank the U-173 near Casablanca
on 16 November.
Almost half the class were lost during
1943. The U-519 failed to return from an
Atlantic patrol in January. Aircraft sank
the U-164 off Pernambuco on 6 January,
the U-507 northwest of Natal on 13 Jan-
u a r y, the U - 1 5 6 east of Barbados on 8
March, the U - 5 2 4 near Madeira on 22
March, the U-174 off Newfoundland on
27 April, the U-514 in the Bay of Biscay
on 8 July, the U-506 west of Vigo on 12
July, the U-513 off the Brazilian coast on
19 July, the U-159 east of Jamaica on 28
J u l y, the U - 1 6 1 near Bahia on 27 Sep-
tember, and the U-508 in the Bay of Bis-
cay on 12 November. Escort carrier air-
craft sank the U-160 south of the Azores,
the U-509 near Madeira, and the U-67 in
the Sargasso Sea between 14 July and 16.
The sloop To t l a n d sank the U - 5 2 2 o f f
Madeira on 22 February; the destroyer
C h a m p l i n sank the U - 1 3 0 near the
Azores on 12 March; the Canadian
corvette P r e s c o t t sank the U - 1 6 3 n o r t h-
west of Cape Finisterre the next day; the
cutter S p e n c e r sank the U - 1 7 5 off Ire-
land on 17 April; the destroyer Oribi and
the corvette Snowflake sank the U - 1 2 5
east of Newfoundland on 6 May; the
Cuban patrol boat CS-13 sank the U-176
near Havana on 15 May; the destroyers
Jo u e t t and Moffett and aircraft sank the
U-128 near Pernambuco on 17 May; the
PC-565 sank the U-521 off the Maryland
coast on 2 June; the sloops K i t e, Wi l d
G o o s e, Wo o d p e c k e r, and W r e n sank the
U-504 northwest of Cape Ortegal on 30
July; the corvette Wallﬂower and the de-
stroyer Wanderer sank the U-523 west of
Vigo on 25 August; the destroyers
Pa t h f i n d e r, Q u e n t i n, and Vi m y sank the
U-162 near Trinidad on 3 September; the
Bogue group sank the U-172 off the Ca-
nary Islands on 13 December.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY 213

U.S. hunter-killer groups sank the U-
515 and the U-68 near Madeira on 9 and
10 April 1944 and the U - 6 6 near the
Cape Verde Islands on 6 May, and they
captured the U - 5 0 5 west of Africa on 4
June. Aircraft sank the U-126 in the Bay
of Biscay on 3 July, and the destroyer es-
corts Frost and Inch sank the U-154 west
of Madeira the same day. The U-129 was
scuttled at Lorient on 18 August.
The destroyer escorts Carter and Neal
A. Scott sank the U - 5 1 8 west of the
Azores on 22 April 1945. The U-511 was
transferred to Japan on 16 September
1943 as the R O - 5 0 0, was surrendered,
and scuttled postwar. The U-155 and the
U - 5 1 6 surrendered and were scuttled
p o s t w a r. The U - 5 1 0 surrendered on 12
May 1945, became the French B o u a n,
and was stricken on 1 May 1959.

TYPE XB (1941)

U-116 (3 May 1941), U-117 (26 July 1941),
U - 1 1 8 (23 September 1941), U - 1 1 9 ( 6
January 1942), U-219 (6 October 1942),
U-220 (16 January 1943), U-233 (8 May
1943), U-234 (23 December 1943)
B u i l d e r : Germania
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1763 tons (surfaced),
2177 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 294970 x 30920 x 15950
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Germania diesel engines, 2
AEG electric motors, 2 shafts. 4200
bhp/800 shp = 16.5/7 knots
R a n g e : 18,450 nm at 10 knots surfaced,
93 nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(stern), total 2 torpedoes, 66 mines, 1 x
105mm gun, 1 x 37mm AA gun, 1 x
20mm AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 52
N o t e s : These very large minelayers (Ger-
m a n y ’s largest wartime boats) carried
their mines in vertical tubes, twelve on
each side (each containing two mines)
built into the main ballast tanks and six
(each containing three mines) in a large
forward hull compartment. They were
used extensively as supply submarines to
support Atlantic operations and for
blockade running.
The U-116 failed to return from an At-
lantic patrol in October 1942. Escort car-
rier aircraft sank the U - 1 1 8, the U - 1 1 7,
and the U - 2 2 0 in the Atlantic on 12
June, 7 August, and 28 October 1943 re-
spectively. The sloop Starling sank the U-
1 1 9 in the Bay of Biscay on 24 June
1943, and the destroyer escorts B a k e r
and Thomas sank the U-233 southeast of
Halifax on 5 July 1944. The U - 2 1 9 b e-
came the Japanese I - 5 0 5 in May 1945
and was surrendered in August at
Djakarta. The U-234 surrendered in May
1945 and was scuttled.214 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY

[ R O M A N I A ] —M A R S U I N U L (4 MAY 1941)

B u i l d e r : Galati
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 620 tons (surfaced);
submerged displacement unknown
D i m e n s i o n s : 190930 x 18940 x 119100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 3680 bhp/1000 shp
= 16/9 knots
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
bow, 2 stern), 1 x 102mm gun, 1 x 37mm
AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 45
N o t e s : The IvS prepared this design as an
improvement of its earlier Ve t e h i n e n f o r
Finland. Deschimag engineers oversaw
its construction in Romania. Soviet
forces seized it on 30 August 1944 and it
became their TS-2. It was sunk by an on-
board torpedo explosion at Poti on 20
February 1945, raised, repaired, and re-
named the N-40 in August 1947 and the
S-40 in June 1949. It was deleted on 28
November 1950 and scrapped.

[ R O M A N I A ] —R E Q U I N U L (22 MAY 1941)

B u i l d e r : Galati
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 585 tons (surfaced), 870
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 216980 x 19940 x 119100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 1840 bhp/1000 shp
= 17/9 knots
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), 40 mines, 1 x 88mm gun, 1 x
20mm AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 40
N o t e s : A minelaying version of the M a r-
s u i n u l, also by the IvS, with the mines
carried in ﬁve vertical tubes on each side
in the main ballast tanks. It too was
seized by Soviet forces on 30 A u g u s t
1944 and became their T S - 1. It was re-
named the N-39 in August 1947 and the
S-39 in June 1949. It was returned to Ro-
mania in July 1951, reverted to its origi-
nal name, and was stricken in the late
1950s.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY 215

TYPE XIV (1941)

U-459–U-460 (13 September 1941), U-461
(8 November 1941), U - 4 6 2 (29 Novem-
ber 1941), U - 4 6 3 (20 December 1941),
U - 4 6 4 (20 December 1941), U - 4 8 7 ( 1 7
October 1942), U - 4 8 8 (17 October
1942), U - 4 8 9 (24 December 1942), U -
490 (24 December 1942)
B u i l d e r : Kiel
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1688 tons (surfaced),
1932 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 220920 x 309100 x 21940
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Germania diesel engines, 2
Siemens electric motors, 2 shafts. 1400
bhp/375 shp = 14.5/6.25 knots
R a n g e : 12,350 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 55
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 37mm AA guns, 1 x 20mm
AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 53
N o t e s : These boats were designed as spe-
cialized supply submarines to support
Atlantic operations and were known pop-
ularly as milchkuh (milk cow).
Allied antisubmarine forces made a
successful concerted effort to destroy
these boats. Aircraft sank the U-464 and
the U-489 southeast of Iceland on 20 Au-
gust 1942 and 5 August 1943, and the U-
4 6 3, the U - 4 5 9, and the U - 4 6 1 in the
Bay of Biscay on 16 May, 24 July, and 30
July 1943. Escort carrier aircraft sank the
U-460, the U-487, and the U-490 in the
Atlantic on 16 April and 13 July 1943
and 12 June 1944. The sloops Kite, Wild
G o o s e, Wo o d c o c k, and Wo o d p e c k e r s a n k
the U-462 in the Bay of Biscay on 30 July
1943, and the destroyer escorts B a r b e r,
Fr o s t, H u s e, and S n o w d e n sank the U -
488 west of the Cape Verde Islands on 26
April 1944.

TYPE VIID (1941)

U - 2 1 3 (24 July 1941), U - 2 1 4 (18 Septem-
ber 1941), U - 2 1 5 (9 October 1941), U -
2 1 6 (23 October 1941), U - 2 1 7 (15 No-
vember 1941), U - 2 1 8 (5 December
1941)
B u i l d e r : Germania
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 965 tons (surfaced), 1080
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 252930 x 21900 x 16950
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Germania diesel engines, 2
AEG electric motors, 2 shafts. 3200
bhp/560 shp = 17/7.5 knots
R a n g e : 11,200 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 69
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 5 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 1 stern), total 14 torpedoes, 15
mines, 1 x 88mm gun, 1 x 20mm AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 44
N o t e s : These minelayers were based on
the Type VIIC design with an additional
compartment inserted abaft the conning
tower to accommodate ﬁve vertical mine
tubes.
The trawler Le Ti g e r sank the U - 2 1 5
east of Boston on 3 July 1942; the sloops
E r n e, R o c h e s t e r, and S a n d w i c h sank the
U-213 east of the Azores on 31 July, and
aircraft sank the U-216 southwest of Ire-
land on 20 October. Aircraft from the es-
cort carrier Bogue sank the U-217 in the
central Atlantic on 5 June 1943, and the
frigate Cooke sank the U-214 in the En-
glish Channel on 26 July 1944. The U -
2 1 8 surrendered in May 1945 and was
scuttled.216 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY

TYPE IXD-2 (1941)

U-177 (1 October 1941), U-178 (28 Octo-
ber 1941), U - 1 7 9 (18 November 1941),
U - 1 8 1 (30 December 1941), U - 1 8 2 ( 3
March 1942), U-196 (24 April 1942), U-
1 9 7 (21 May 1942), U - 1 9 8 (15 June
1942), U-199 (12 July 1943), U-200 (20
August 1942), U - 8 4 7 (5 September
1942), U - 8 4 8 (6 October 1942), U - 8 4 9
(31 October 1942), U-850 (7 December
1942), U-851 (15 January 1943), U-852
(28 January 1943), U - 8 5 9 (2 March
1943), U - 8 6 0 (23 March 1943), U - 8 6 1
(29 April 1943), U-862 (5 June 1943), U-
8 6 3 (29 June 1943), U - 8 6 4 (12 A u g u s t
1943), U - 8 7 1 (7 September 1943), U -
8 7 2 (20 October 1943), U - 8 7 3 (16 No-
vember 1943), U - 8 7 4 (21 December
1943), U-875 (16 February 1944), U-876
(29 February 1944), U - 8 8 3 (28 A p r i l
1944)
B u i l d e r : Bremen
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1616 tons (surfaced),
1804 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 287950 x 24970 x 17990
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2
MWM diesel generators, 2 Siemens elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 4400 plus 1000
bhp/740 shp = 19.25/7 knots
R a n g e : 13,450 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 63
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern), total 24 torpedoes, 1 x
105mm gun, 1 x 37mm AA gun, 1 x
20mm AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 57
N o t e s : These boats used a conventional
power plant to achieve a slightly higher
surfaced speed than the earlier Type IXC.
The U - 8 8 3 was the only example com-
missioned of the Type IXD/42, which
had a greatly increased range of 31,000
nautical miles. Twenty-three additional
Type IXD/42 boats were canceled.
Aircraft sank the U - 2 0 0 southwest of
Iceland on 24 June 1943, the U-199 east
of Rio de Janeiro on 31 July, the U - 1 9 7
near Madagascar on 20 August, the U -
8 4 9 west of the Congo river on 25 No-
v e m b e r, the U - 8 4 8 and the U - 1 7 7 o f f
Acension Island on 5 November 1943
and 6 February 1944, the U - 8 7 1 n o r t h-
west of the Azores on 26 September and
the U - 8 6 3 near Recife three days later,
and drove the U - 8 5 2 ashore on the So-
mali coast on 3 May. Escort carrier air-
craft sank the U-847 in the Sargasso Sea
on 27 August 1943, the U - 8 5 0 west of
Madeira on 20 December, and the U-860
off St. Helena on 15 June 1944. The de-
stroyer A c t i v e sank the U - 1 7 9 n e a r
Capetown on 8 October 1942; the de-
stroyer M a c k e n z i e sank the U - 1 8 2 n e a r
Madeira on 16 May 1943; the frigate
Fi n d h o r n and the Indian sloop G o d a v a r i
sank the U - 1 9 8 near the Seychelles on
12 August 1944; the submarine Tr e n-
chant torpedoed the U - 8 5 9 in the
Malacca Straits on 23 September; the
submarine Venturer torpedoed the U-864
while both were submerged off Bergen
on 9 February 1945. The U-851 and the
U-196 failed to return from patrols to the
Indian Ocean in April and November
1944.
The U - 8 7 2 was stricken after USAAF
bombers badly damaged it at Bremen on
29 July 1944, and the U - 1 7 8 was scuttled
at Bordeaux on 25 August. The U - 1 8 1 a n d
the U - 8 6 2 became the Japanese I - 5 0 1 a n d
I - 5 0 2 in May 1945 and were surrendered
at Singapore in August. The surviving
boats were surrendered at war’s end.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY 217

TYPE IXD-1 (1941)

U-180 (10 December 1941), U-195 (8 April
1942)
B u i l d e r : Bremen
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1610 tons (surfaced),
1799 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 287950 x 24970 x 17990
M a c h i n e r y : 6 Daimler-Benz diesel en-
gines, 2 Siemens electric motors, 2
shafts. 9000 bhp/740 shp = 20.75/7
knots
R a n g e : 9500 nm at 14 knots surfaced, 115
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern), total 24 torpedoes, 1 x
105mm gun, 1 x 37mm AA gun, 1 x
20mm AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 57
N o t e s : These boats were designed as faster
versions of the Type IXC and used six S-
boat engines. They were converted to
transport submarines to carry 250 tons of
freight in 1943 with two replacement
Germania diesel engines generating 1400
bhp (top speed: 15.75 knots) and all tor-
pedo tubes removed. The U-180 was lost
in the Bay of Biscay in August 1944. The
U - 1 9 5 became the Japanese I - 5 0 6 i n
May 1945 and was surrendered in August
at Djarkarta.

TYPE IXC/40 (1942)

U-183 (9 January 1942), U-184 (21 Febru-
ary 1942), U-185 (2 March 1942), U-186
(11 March 1942), U - 1 8 7 (16 March
1942), U - 1 8 8 (31 March 1942), U - 1 8 9
(1 May 1942), U-190 (8 June 1942), U-
191 (3 July 1942), U-192 (31 July 1942),
U-193 (24 August 1942), U-194 (22 Sep-
tember 1942), U-841 (21 October 1942),
U - 8 4 2 (14 November 1942), U - 8 4 3 ( 1 5
December 1942), U - 8 4 4 (30 December
1942), U-845 (22 January 1943), U-846
(17 February 1943), U - 8 5 3 (11 March
1943), U-854 (5 April 1943), U-855 (17
April 1943), U - 8 5 6 (11 May 1943), U -
8 5 7 (23 May 1943), U - 8 5 8 (17 June
1943), U-865 (11 July 1943), U-866 (29
July 1943), U-867 (24 August 1943), U-
868 (18 September 1943), U-869 (5 Oc-
tober 1943), U - 8 7 0 (29 October 1943),
U - 8 7 7 (10 December 1943), U - 8 7 8 ( 6
January 1944), U-879 (11 January 1944),
U - 8 8 0 (10 February 1944), U - 8 8 1 ( 4
March 1944), U-889 (5 April 1944)
B u i l d e r : Bremen
U - 1 6 7–U - 1 6 8 (5 March 1942), U - 1 6 9–
U-170 (6 June 1942), U-801–U-802 (31
October 1942), U - 8 0 3– U -8 0 4 (1 A p r i l
1943), U-805 (1943), U-806 (1943)
B u i l d e r : Seebeckwerft
U-526–U-527 (3 June 1942), U-528 (1 July
1942), U-529 (15 July 1942), U-530 (28
July 1942), U-531 (12 August 1942), U-
5 3 2 (26 August 1942), U - 5 3 3 (11 Sep-
tember 1942), U - 5 3 4 (23 September
1942), U - 5 3 5 (8 October 1942), U - 5 3 6
(21 October 1942), U-537 (7 November
1942), U-538 (20 November 1942), U -
539 (4 December 1942), U-540 (18 De-
cember 1942), U - 5 4 1 (5 January 1943),
U-542 (19 January 1943), U-543 (3 Feb-
ruary 1943), U-544 (17 February 1943),
U - 5 4 5 (3 March 1943), U-546 ( 1 7
March 1943), U - 5 4 7 (3 April 1943), U -
5 4 8 (14 April 1943), U - 5 4 9 (28 A p r i l
1943), U - 1 2 2 1 (2 May 1943),
U-550 (12 May 1943), U - 1 2 2 2 (9 June
1943), U - 1 2 2 3 (16 June 1943), U - 1 2 2 4
(7 July 1943), U - 1 2 2 5 (21 July 1943),218 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY

U - 1 2 2 6 (21 August 1943), U - 1 2 2 7 ( 1 8
September 1943), U-1228 (2 October
1943), U - 1 2 2 9 (22 October 1943), U -
1 2 3 0 (8 November 1943), U - 1 2 3 1 ( 1 8
November 1943), U-1232 (20 December
1943), U-1233 (23 December 1943), U-
1234 (7 January 1944), U-1235 (25 Jan-
uary 1944)
B u i l d e r : Deutschewerft
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1144 tons (surfaced),
1257 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 252900 x 22980 x 15950
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2
Siemens electric motors, 2 shafts. 4400
bhp/740 shp = 18.25/7.25 knots
R a n g e : 13,850 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 63
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern), total 22 torpedoes, 1 x
105mm gun, 1 x 37mm AA gun, 1 x
20mm AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 48
N o t e s : These boats were similar to the ear-
lier Type IXC, with heavier antiaircraft
batteries and slightly greater range. A n
additional 59 units were either destroyed
on the slip or canceled.
The U-183 failed to return from an At-
lantic patrol in November 1942, as did
the U - 5 2 9 in February 1943, the U - 1 9 3
in April 1944, the U-866 and the U-865
in September 1944, the U-1226 in Octo-
ber 1944, and the U-857 in April 1945,
The U - 5 2 6 was mined off Lorient on
14 April 1943, as were the U-854 and the
U-803 in the Baltic on 4 February and 27
April 1944.
Aircraft sank the U - 1 6 9, the U - 1 9 4,
and the U - 8 4 4 south of Iceland on 27
March, 14 June, and 16 October 1943,
the U-167 near the Canary Islands on 6
April, the U - 1 8 9 and the U - 5 4 0 o f f
Greenland on 23 April and 17 October,
the U-585 in the Bay of Biscay on 5 July,
the U - 5 3 3 in the Gulf of Oman on 16
O c t o b e r, and the U - 5 4 2 off Madeira on
28 November. Escort carrier aircraft sank
the U - 5 2 7, the U - 6 2 8, and the U - 1 8 5
west of the Azores on 23 July, 11 August,
and 24 August. The destroyers B e v e r l e y
and Vi m y sank the U - 1 8 7 in the North
Atlantic on 4 February; the destroyer
H e s p e r u s sank the U - 1 9 1 off Greenland
and the U-186 west of the Azores on 23
April and 12 May; the corvette Loosestrife
sank the U-192 off Greenland on 6 May;
the destroyer Vidette sank the U-531 off
Newfoundland the same day; the sloop
F l e e t w o o d and aircraft sank the U - 5 2 8
southwest of Ireland on 11 May; the
frigate Byard sank the U-841 off Green-
land on 17 October; the sloops S t a r l i n g
and Wild Goose sank the U - 8 4 2 in the
western North Atlantic on 6 November;
the frigate N e n e and the Canadian
corvettes Calgary and Snowberry sank the
U - 5 3 6 off the Azores on 20 November;
the sloop C r a n e and the frigate Fo l e y
sank the U-538 southwest of Ireland the
next day.
Aircraft sank the U - 5 4 5 off the He-
brides on 10 February 1944, the U - 8 4 6
and the U - 1 2 2 2 in the Bay of Biscay on
4 May and 11 July, and the U - 1 2 2 5 a n d
the U - 8 6 7 off Bergen on 24 June and 19
S e p t e m b e r. Escort carrier aircraft sank
the U - 5 4 4, the U - 5 4 3, and the U - 1 2 2 9
in the central Atlantic on 16 January,
2 July, and 20 August, and the B l o c k
I s l a n d group sank the U - 8 0 1 there on 17
March. British and Canadian antisubma-
rine vessels sank the U - 8 4 5 in the North
Atlantic on 10 March; the destroyer
C h a m p l i n and the destroyer escort H u s e
sank the U - 8 5 6; the destroyer escorts
G a n d y, Jo y c e, and Pe t e r s o n sank the
U - 5 5 0 off New York on 7 and 16 A p r i l ;
the destroyer escorts A h r e n s and E u g e n e
E. Elmore sank the U - 5 5 9 off Madeira
on 29 May; the Dutch submarineA WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY 219

Z w a a r d v i s c h and the U.S. submarine
Flounder sank the U-168 and the U-537
in the Java Sea on 6 October and 9 No-
vember; the Canadian corvette S t .
Thomas sank the U-877 northwest of the
Azores on 27 December.
Aircraft sank the U - 8 4 3 and the
U-534 in the Kattegat on 9 April and 5
May 1945. USAAF aircraft bombed the
U - 8 7 0 and the U - 1 2 2 1 in Bremen and
Kiel on 30 March and 3 April. Hunter-
killer groups in the North Atlantic sank
the U-866 on 18 March, the U-1235 on
15 April, the U - 8 8 0 on 16 April, the
U - 5 4 6 and the U - 5 4 8 on 24 April, and
the U-879 on 30 April. The destroyer es-
corts Howard D. Crow and K o i n e r s a n k
the U - 8 6 9 off New Jersey on 11 Fe b r u-
ary; the corvette Tintagel Castle and the
destroyer Va n q u i s h e r sank the U - 8 7 8 i n
the Bay of Biscay on 10 April; the subma-
rine Besugo torpedoed the U - 1 8 3 in the
Java Sea on 23 April; the destroyer escort
Farquhar sank the U-881 off Newfound-
land on 6 May; and the destroyer escort
Atherton and the frigate Moberly sank the
U-853 off New London the same day.
The U-1224 became the Japanese RO-
5 0 1 in February 1944 and was sunk by
the destroyer escort Francis M. Robinson
off the Cape Verde Islands on 13 May
1944.
The surviving boats were surrendered
or scuttled in May 1945, apart from the
U - 1 2 3 1 , which became the Soviet B - 2 6
in 1947 and was stricken in 1960.

[ S W E D E N ] —N E P T U N CLASS (1942)

N a j a d (26 June 1942), N ä c k e n (26 June
1942), Neptun (17 November 1942)
B u i l d e r : Kockums
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 530 tons (surfaced), 730
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 205950 x 21900 x 11920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 1800 bhp/1000 shp
= 15/10 knots
A r m a m e n t : 5 x 533mm torpedo tubes (3
b o w, 2 stern), total 10 torpedoes, 20
mines, 1 x 40mm AA gun, 1 x 20mm AA
gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 35
N o t e s : This class virtually repeated the
earlier Delﬁnen type but incorporated an
additional stern torpedo tube. They were
reconstructed in the early 1950s with
streamlined sails, snorkels, and no deck
guns. These boats were stricken on 1
April 1966.220 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY

G E R M A N Y: TYPE VIIC 41 (1943)

U - 1 1 6 3 (12 June 1943), U - 1 1 6 4 (3 July
1943), U - 1 1 6 5 (20 July 1943),
U - 1 1 6 6–U - 1 1 6 7 (28 August 1943), U -
1168–U-1169 (2 October 1943), U-1170
(14 October 1943), U-1171 (23 Novem-
ber 1943), U-1172 (3 December 1943)
B u i l d e r : Danziger
U - 2 9 2 (17 July 1943), U - 2 9 3 (30 July
1943), U - 2 9 4 (27 August 1943), U - 2 9 5
(13 September 1943), U - 2 9 6 (25 Sep-
tember 1943), U-297 (9 October 1943),
U-298 (25 October 1943), U-299 (6 No-
vember 1943), U - 3 0 0 (23 November
1943), U - 1 2 7 1 (8 December 1943), U -
1 2 7 2 (23 December 1943), U - 1 2 7 3 ( 1 0
January 9144), U - 1 2 7 4 (25 January
1944), U - 1 2 7 5 (8 February 1944), U -
1 2 7 6 (25 February 1944), U - 1 2 7 7 ( 1 8
March 1944), U - 1 2 7 8 (15 April 1944),
U-1279 (May 1944)
B u i l d e r : Vegesack
U - 9 9 5–U - 9 9 6 (22 July 1943), U - 9 9 7–
U-998 (18 August 1943), U-999–U-1000
(17 September 1943), U - 1 0 0 1–U - 1 0 0 2
(6 October 1943), U - 1 0 0 3–U - 1 0 0 4 ( 2 7
October 1943), U - 1 0 0 5–U - 1 0 0 6 ( 1 7
November 1943), U - 1 0 0 7–U - 1 0 0 8 ( 8
December 1943), U - 1 0 0 9–U - 1 0 1 0 ( 5
January 1944), U - 1 0 1 3 (19 January
1944), U - 1 0 1 4 (30 January 1944), U -
1015 (7 February 1944), U-1016 (8 Feb-
ruary 1944), U - 1 0 1 7–U - 1 0 1 8 (1 March
1944), U - 1 0 1 9 (22 March 1944),
U-1020 (22 March 1944), U - 1 0 2 1–
U - 1 0 2 2 (12 April 1944), U - 1 0 2 3–
U-1024 (3 May 1944), U-1025 (24 May
1944)
B u i l d e r : Blohm und Voss
U - 9 2 9 (23 July 1944), U - 9 3 0 (5 October
1944)
B u i l d e r : Neptun
U - 3 1 8 (25 September 1943), U - 3 1 9 ( 1 6
October 1943), U - 3 2 0 (6 November
1943), U - 3 2 1 (17 November 1943), U -
322 (18 December 1943), U-323 (8 Jan-
uary 1944), U - 3 2 4 (12 February 1944),
U-325 (25 March 1944), U-326 (22 April
1944), U-327 (27 May 1944), U-328 (15
July 1944)
B u i l d e r : Flenderwerke
U - 1 3 0 1 (22 December 1943), U - 1 3 0 3 ( 1 0
February 1944), U - 1 3 0 2 (4 April 1944),
U - 1 3 0 5 (10 July 1944), U - 1 3 0 4 (4 A u-
gust 1944), U - 1 3 0 7 (29 September
1944), U - 1 3 0 6 (25 October 1944), U -
1308 (22 November 1944)
B u i l d e r : Flensburger
U - 1 0 6 3 (8 June 1944), U - 1 0 6 4 (22 June
1944), U-1065 (3 August 1944)
B u i l d e r : Germania
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 747 tons (surfaced), 847
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 220960 x 20940 x 15990
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2 AEG
electric motors, 2 shafts. 3200 bhp/560
shp = 17/7.5 knots
R a n g e : 8500 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 80
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 5 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 1 stern), total 14 torpedoes, 1 x
88mm gun, 1 x 20mm AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 44
N o t e s : This ﬁnal production development
of the basic Type VII design featured a
stronger hull that permitted an increase
in the diving depth to over 500 feet. Many
boats also commissioned with heavier an-
tiaircraft batteries, usually a single 37mm
gun and four 20mm weapons.
This group also suffered heavy casual-
ties. Nine boats were sunk during 1944,
two (the U-1013 and the U-1015) in ac-
cidents, and a further 23 in 1945. Six-
teen boats were scuttled to prevent their
seizure by Allied forces at the end of the
w a r, and 31 boats were surrendered.
One, the U-995, became a museum ves-
sel postwar.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY 221

TYPE VIIF (1943)

U-1059 (12 March 1943), U-1060 (18 April
1943), U - 1 0 6 1 (22 April 1943), U - 1 0 6 2
(8 May 1943)
B u i l d e r : Germania
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1094 tons (surfaced),
1181 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 254970 x 239110 x 16900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Germania diesel engines, 2
AEG electric motors, 2 shafts. 3200
bhp/560 shp = 17/7.5 knots
R a n g e : 14,700 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 75
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 5 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 1 stern), total 39 torpedoes, 1 x
37mm AA gun, 2 x twin 20mm AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 46
N o t e s : These boats were lengthened
versions of the Type VIIC. They were
designed to supply torpedoes to A t l a n t i c
boats and carried 24 torpedoes in the ad-
ditional compartment, 10 in the torpedo
rooms (ﬁve in the tubes and ﬁve reloads)
and ﬁve more in pressure-tight compart-
ments on top of the pressure hull.
Aircraft from the escort carrier B l o c k
Island sank the U-1059 southwest of the
Cape Verde Islands on 19 March 1944;
the destroyer escort Fe s s e n d e n sank the
U-1062 in the central Atlantic on 30 Sep-
tember; aircraft from the carrier Implaca-
ble drove the U-1060 ashore at Bronnoy-
sund on 27 October. The U - 1 0 6 1 w a s
surrendered in May 1945.

G E R M A N Y: TYPE X X I I I ( 1 9 4 4 ), U - 2 3 2 6 ( 1 9 4 4 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

U - 2 3 2 1 (17 April 1944), U - 2 3 2 2 (30 A p r i l
1944), U - 2 3 2 3 (31 May 1944), U - 2 3 2 4
(16 June 1944), U-2325 (13 July 1944),
U-2326 (17 July 1944), U-2327 (29 July
1944), U - 2 3 2 9 (11 August 1944), U -
2328 (17 August 1944), U-2330 (19 Au-
gust 1944), U - 2 3 3 1 (22 August 1944),
U - 2 3 3 4 (26 August 1944), U - 2 3 3 5 ( 3 1
August 1944), U - 2 3 3 6 (10 September
1944), U-2337 (15 September 1944), U-
2338 (18 September 1944), U-2339 (22
September 1944), U - 2 3 4 0 (28 Septem-
ber 1944), U-2341 (3 October 1944), U-
2 3 4 2 (13 October 1944), U - 2 3 4 3 ( 1 8
October 1944), U - 2 3 4 4 (24 October
1944), U - 2 3 4 5 (28 October 1944), U -
2346 (31 October 1944), U-2347 (6 No-
vember 1944), U - 2 3 4 8 (11 November222 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY

1944), U-2349 (20 November 1944), U-
2 3 5 0 (22 November 1944), U - 2 3 5 1 ( 2 5
November 1944), U - 2 3 5 2 (5 December
1944), U - 2 3 5 3 (6 December 1944), U -
2 3 5 4 (10 December 1944), U - 2 3 5 5 ( 1 3
December 1944), U - 2 3 5 6–U - 2 3 5 7 ( 1 9
December 1944), U-2358 (20 December
1944), U-2359 (23 December 1944), U-
2360 (29 December 1944), U - 2 3 6 1 ( 4
January 1945), U - 2 3 6 2 (11 January
1945), U - 2 3 6 3 (18 January 1945), U -
2 3 6 4 (23 January 1945), U - 2 3 6 5 ( 2 6
January 1945), U - 2 3 6 6 (17 Fe b r u a r y
1945), U - 2 3 6 7 (23 February 1945), U -
2 3 6 8 (19 March 1945), U - 2 3 6 9 ( 2 4
March 1945), U-2370 (March 1945), U-
2371 (18 April 1945)
B u i l d e r : Deutschewerft
U - 2 3 3 2 (18 October 1944), U - 2 3 3 3 ( 1 6
November 1944), U-4701 (14 December
1944), U-4702 (20 December 1944), U-
4703 (3 January 1945), U-4705 (11 Jan-
uary 1945), U - 4 7 0 6 (19 January 1945),
U - 4 7 0 7 (25 January 1945), U - 4 7 0 9 ( 8
February 1945), U - 4 7 0 4 (13 Fe b r u a r y
1945), U - 4 7 1 1 (21 February 1945), U -
4712 (1 March 1945), U-4710 (14 April
1945), U - 4 7 1 3 (19 April 1945), U - 4 7 1 4
(26 April 1945)
B u i l d e r : Germania
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 234 tons (surfaced), 258
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 1139100 x 99100 x 12920
M a c h i n e r y : 1 MWM diesel engine, 1 AEG
electric motor, 1 BBC “c r e e p” e l e c t r i c
motor, 1 shaft. 575 bhp/575 plus 35 shp
= 9.75/12.5/4 knots
R a n g e : 2600 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 63
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 2 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 14
N o t e s : The Type XXIII boats were the
coastal equivalents of the new Type XXI
oceanic submarines. Like them, they
brought together a hull designed for high
underwater speed with more powerful
batteries, powerful electric motors, and
snorkels to maximize their operations
while submerged. In addition to their
main motors, these boats also used a
low-power motor for silent, slow-speed
operation. Their small size, however, was
a major disadvantage, since they were
very crowded internally and had no space
for reload torpedoes, which limited their
suitability for operations. A total of 491
units of this type were ordered, of which
61 were completed and commissioned,
but only 6 undertook operations.
The U - 2 3 2 3 and the U - 2 3 4 1 w e r e
mined in the Baltic on 26 July and 26
December 1944. British aircraft sank the
U - 2 3 3 8 north of Frederika on 4 May
1945. The U-2331, the U-2344, and the
U-2367 were lost in accidents.
Almost all of the other boats were ei-
ther scuttled or surrendered in May
1945. The U-2353 became the Soviet N-
3 1 in 1948 and was scrapped in 1963,
and the U - 4 7 0 6 became the Norwegian
K n e r t e r in 1948 and was stricken in
1954. The Federal German Navy salved
the U-2365 and the U-2367 in 1956, re-
constructed them with 600-horsepower
diesel-electric machinery and new super-
structures, and commissioned them as
the H a i and the H e c h t. They were
scrapped in 1968–1969.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY 223

G E R M A N Y: TYPE X X I ( 1 9 4 4 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

U - 3 5 0 1 (19 April 1944), U - 3 5 0 2 (6 July
1944), U - 3 5 0 3 (27 July 1944), U - 3 5 0 4
(19 August 1944), U - 3 5 0 5–U - 3 5 0 6 ( 2 5
August 1944), U - 3 5 0 7 (16 September
1944), U - 3 5 0 8 (22 September 1944),
U-3509 (27 September 1944), U-3510
(4 October 1944), U-3511–U-3512
(11 October 1944), U - 3 5 1 3–U - 3 5 1 4
(21 October 1944), U - 3 5 1 5–U - 3 5 1 6 ( 4
November 1944), U - 3 5 1 7 (6 November
1944), U - 3 5 1 8 (11 November 1944), U -
3 5 1 9–U - 3 5 2 0 (23 November 1944),
U - 3 5 2 1–U - 3 5 2 2 (3 December 1944), U -
3 5 2 3–U - 3 5 2 4 (14 December 1944),
U - 3 5 2 5–U - 3 5 2 6 (23 December 1944),
U - 3 5 2 7–U - 3 5 2 8 (10 January 1945), U -
3 5 2 9–U - 3 5 3 0 (26 January 1945)
B u i l d e r : Schichau
U - 2 5 0 1 (12 May 1944), U - 2 5 0 2 (15 June
1944), U - 2 5 0 3 (29 June 1944), U - 2 5 0 4
(18 July 1944), U - 2 5 0 5 (27 July 1944),
U - 2 5 0 6 (5 August 1944), U - 2 5 0 7 ( 1 4
August 1944), U-2508 (19 August 1944),
U - 2 5 0 9 (27 August 1944), U - 2 5 1 0 ( 2 9
August 1944), U - 2 5 1 1 (2 September
1944), U - 2 5 1 2 (7 September 1944), U -
2513 (14 September 1944), U-2514 (17
September 1944), U - 2 5 1 5 (22 Septem-
ber 1944), U-2516 (27 September 1944),
U - 2 5 1 7–U - 2 5 1 8 (4 October 1944), U -
2 5 2 0 (16 October 1944), U - 2 5 1 9 ( 1 8
October 1944), U - 2 5 2 1 (18 October
1944), U - 2 5 2 2 (22 October 1944), U -
2 5 2 3 (25 October 1944), U - 2 5 2 4 ( 3 0
October 1944), U - 2 5 2 5 (30 October
1944), U - 2 5 2 8–U - 2 5 2 9 (18 November
1944), U - 2 5 3 0 (23 November 1944),
U - 2 5 2 6–U - 2 5 2 7 (30 November 1944),
U - 2 5 3 1 (5 December 1944), U - 2 5 3 2–
U-2533 (7 December 1944), U-2534 (11
December 1944), U - 2 5 3 5–U - 2 5 3 6 ( 1 6
December 1944), U - 2 5 3 7 (22 December
1944), U - 2 5 3 8–U - 2 5 3 9 (6 January 1 9 4 5 ) ,
U - 2 5 4 0–U - 2 5 4 1 (13 January 1945), U -
2 5 4 2 (22 January 1945), U - 2 5 4 3–
U - 2 5 4 4 ( Februrary 1945), U - 2 5 4 5 ( 1 2
February 1945), U - 2 5 4 6 (19 Fe b r u a r y
1945), U - 2 5 4 8 (9 March 1945), U - 2 5 5 1–
U - 2 5 5 2 (31 March 1945)
B u i l d e r : Blohm und Voss
U - 3 0 0 1 (30 May 1944), U - 3 0 0 2 (9 July
1944), U - 3 0 0 3 (18 July 1944), U - 3 0 0 4
(26 July 1944), U - 3 0 0 5 (18 A u g u s t
1944), U - 3 0 0 6 (25 August 1944),
U-3007 (4 September 1944), U-3008 (15
September 1944), U - 3 0 0 9 (30 Septem-
ber 1944), U - 3 0 1 3 (19 October 1944),
U - 3 0 1 0–U - 3 0 1 2 (20 October 1944), U -
3 0 1 4 (25 October 1944), U - 3 0 1 5 ( 2 7
October 1944), U-3016 (2 November
1944), U - 3 0 1 7 (5 November 1944), U -
3 0 1 9 (15 November 1944), U - 3 0 2 0 ( 1 6
November 1944), U-3021 (27 November
1944), U - 3 0 1 8 (29 November 1944),224 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: GERMANY

U - 3 0 2 2 (30 November 1944), U - 3 0 2 3 ( 2
December 1944), U - 3 0 2 4–U - 3 0 2 5 ( 6
December 1944), U-3026 (14 December
1944), U-3027 (18 December 1944), U-
3 0 2 8 (22 December 1944), U - 3 0 2 9 ( 2 8
December 1944), U-3030 (31 December
1944), U-3031 (6 January 1945), U-3032
(10 January 1945), U - 3 0 3 3 (20 January
1945), U - 3 0 3 4 (21 January 1945), U -
3 0 3 5 (24 January 1945), U - 3 0 3 6 ( 2 7
January 1945), U - 3 0 3 7 (31 January
1945), U - 3 0 3 8 (7 February 1945), U -
3 0 4 0 (10 February 1945), U - 3 0 3 9 ( 1 4
February 1945), U - 3 0 4 1 (23 Fe b r u a r y
1945), U-3044 (1 March 1945)
B u i l d e r : Bremen
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1595 tons (surfaced),
1790 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 251980 x 21980 x 20980
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2
Siemens electric motors, 2 Siemens
“ c r e ep” electric motors, 2 shafts. 4000
bhp/5500 plus 220 shp = 15.5/17.25/5
knots
R a n g e : 15,500 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 30
nm at 15 knots/340 nm at 5 knots
submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 23 torpedoes, 2 x twin 20mm
AA guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 57
N o t e s : The Type XXI boats were the most
inﬂuential submarine type of World War
II on postwar submarine development.
The design brought together a hull opti-
mized for high underwater speed with
more powerful batteries, powerful elec-
tric motors, and snorkels to maximize
their operations while submerged. In ad-
dition to their main motors, these boats
also used low-power motors for silent,
slow-speed operation. They had good tor-
pedo batteries, antiaircraft mounts faired
into the sail, and advanced radar and sen-
sor suites that retracted into the sail for
streamlining. Orders were placed for 739
boats, but only 118 were completed and
commissioned; the U-2511 alone under-
took an operational mission.
The U - 3 5 2 0 and the U - 3 5 1 9 w e r e
mined in the Baltic on 31 January and 2
March 1945. British aircraft sank or
wrecked the U-2503, the U-2521, the U-
2524, and the U-3032 in Flensburg Fjord
on 3 May, and another sank the U-3523
in the Skagerrak on 6 May. Allied bomb-
ing raids sank 12 of the type in port dur-
ing 1945 before they became operational
for front-line duties.
Almost all the other boats were scut-
tled or surrendered in May 1945. The U-
3008 went to the United States for trials
and experiments and was sunk as a target
in May 1954. The U-2529, the U-3035,
the U-3041, and the U-3515 became the
Soviet B - 2 7 through the B - 3 0 and were
broken up in 1958. Components of at
least 11 other boats were seized by the
Soviets, but it is not certain that they
were completed and put into service.
The U-2540 was salved by the Federal
German Navy in 1957, reconstructed
with new 1200-horsepower diesel-
electric machinery and revised super-
structure, and commissioned in 1960 as
the Wilhelm Bauer. It was decommis-
sioned on 15 March 1983 and trans-
ferred to the Deutsches Schiffahrtsmu-
seum in Bremerhaven as an exhibit.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: ITA LY 225

[ S PA I N ] — D CLASS (1944)

D . 1 (11 May 1944), D . 2 (21 December
1944), D.3 (20 February 1952)
B u i l d e r : Cartagena
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1065 tons (surfaced),
1480 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 275960 x 21990 x 13920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Sulzer diesel engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 5000 bhp/1350
shp = 20.5/9.5 knots
R a n g e : 9000 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 80
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), 1 x 120mm gun, 4 x 37mm AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 60
N o t e s : The IvS designed these boats as
faster versions of its earlier E-1 type with
more powerful diesel engines and length-
ened machinery spaces. They were or-
dered in 1933, but the Spanish Civil War
halted work; their construction time con-
sequently was very protracted. They were
stricken between 1969 and 1971.

N O T E : U-792–U-795 and U-1405–U-1407 were experimental boats. U-112 - U-115, U-329, U-330,
U-395, U-491 - U-500, U-684–U-700, U-723–U-730, U-769, U-770, U-780–U-791, U-796–U-800,
U-823, U-824, U-829–U-840, U-882, U-884–U-888, U-890–U-900, U-902, U-908–U-920, U-931–
U-950, U-1011, U-1012, U-1026–U-1050, U-1066–U-1100, U-1111–U-1130, U-1133–U-1160,
U-1173–U-1190, U-1211–U-1220, U-1236–U-1270, U-1280–U-1300, U-1309–1404, U-1408–
U-2320, U-2372–U-2500, U-2547, U-2549, U-2550, U-2553–U-3000, U-3042, U-3043, U-3045–
U-3500, U-3530–U-4700, U-4708, U-4713, and U-4714 were cancelled, or destroyed on the slip by
enemy action before launching.

I TA LY
M A M E L I CLASS (1926)

Goffredo Mameli (9 December 1926), P i e r
C a p p o n i (19 June 1927), Giovanni da
P r o c i d a (1 April 1929), Tito Speri ( 2 5
May 1928)
B u i l d e r : Tosi
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 810 tons (surfaced), 993
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 2119110 x 21940 x 14910
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Tosi diesel engines, 2 CGE
electric motors, 2 shafts. 3000 bhp/1100
shp = 15/7.5 knots
R a n g e : 3500 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 65
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern), total 10 torpedoes, 1 x
102mm gun, 2 x 13.2mm machine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 49
N o t e s : Cavallini designed these seagoing
submarines after examining German de-
signs and U-boats in detail. They featured
a single hull with saddle main ballast
tanks, a fine entrance for high surface
speed, and a substantial conning tower.
They were strongly built, handled and
dived well, but initially suffered from
some instability problems. The subma-
rine Rorqual torpedoed the Pier Capponi
off Stromboli on 31 March 1941. The
three other boats received new 4000-bhp
Tosi diesel engines in 1942, raising their
surface speed to 17 knots. They were dis-
carded on 1 February 1948.226 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: ITA LY

I TA LY: BALILLA C L A S S (1927), ANTONIO SCIESA ( 1 9 2 8 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Balilla (20 February 1927), Domenico Mil-
l e l i r e (19 September 1927), Enrico To t i
(14 April 1928), Antonio Sciesa (12 A u-
gust 1928), [Brazil]—H u m a i t a (11 June
1927)
B u i l d e r : Muggiano
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1427 tons (surfaced),
1874 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 2 8 3990 (H u m a i t a: 285950) x
25970 x 15950
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Fiat (H u m a i t a: A n s a l d o )
diesel engines, 2 Savigliano electric mo-
tors, 2 shafts. 4900 bhp/2200 shp = 16/7
knots
R a n g e : 13,000 nm at 7 knots surfaced, 80
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern), total 16 torpedoes, 1 x
120mm gun, 2 x 13.2mm machine guns
(not on Humaita)
C o m p l e m e n t : 77 (Humaita: 61)
N o t e s : These double-hull cruiser sub-
marines were designed for long-range op-
erations in the Red Sea and Indian
Ocean and for colonial service. Their de-
sign owed much to the German UE Type
II minelayer U-120 that was in Italian
hands after World War I. An unusual fea-
ture was the auxiliary 425-bhp Fiat diesel
engine for cruising. They handled and
dived well but suffered from some stabil-
ity problems. During World War II they
initially undertook offensive patrols but
were too large for Mediterranean service
and transferred to supply runs to North
Africa. U.S. aircraft sank the A n t o n i o
Sciesa off Tobruk on 12 November 1942.
The Balilla and the Domenico Millelire
were laid up in April 1941, and the E n-
rico Toti was laid up two years later.
The Brazilian H u m a i t a was discarded
in 1951.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: ITA LY 227

P I S A N I CLASS (1927)

Vettor Pisani (24 November 1927), Marcan-
tonio Colonna (26 December 1927), Gio-
vani Bausan (24 March 1928), D e s
Geneys (14 November 1928), [Turkey]—
Dumlupinar (4 March 1931)
B u i l d e r : CDT
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 866 tons (surfaced), 1040
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 223990 x 20900 x 16920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Tosi (D u m l u p i n a r: MAN)
diesel engines, 2 CGE electric motors, 2
shafts. 3000 bhp/1100 (D u m l u p i n a r:
1400) shp = 15/8.25 knots (Dumlupinar:
17.5/9 knots)
R a n g e : 5000 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 108
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern), total 10 torpedoes, 1 x
102mm gun, 2 x 13.2mm machine guns
(Dumlupinar: 1 machine gun)
C o m p l e m e n t : 48
N o t e s : Bernardis was responsible for the
design of these seagoing submarines to
the same specification as the M a m e l i
class. They were a single-hull type, with
saddle main ballast tanks, and performed
similarly, though their oil bunkerage was
greater and endowed them with in-
creased range. Their slow speed reduced
their operational utility, and all but the
Vettor Pisani (which remained in service
and was scrapped in 1947) were laid up
in April 1942.
Bernardis corrected the stability prob-
lems of the type in the design for the
Turkish Dumlupinar. It remained in ser-
vice until the early 1950s.

ETTORE FIERAMOSCA (15 APRIL 1929)

B u i l d e r : Tosi
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1530 tons (surfaced),
2094 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 275960 x 27930 x 16990
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Tosi diesel engines, 2
Marelli electric motors, 2 shafts. 5200
bhp/2300 shp = 15/8 knots
R a n g e : 5000 nm at 9 knots surfaced, 80
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 4 stern), total 14 torpedoes, 1 x
120mm gun, 2 x twin 13.2mm machine
guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 78
N o t e s : Bernardis designed this cruiser sub-
marine to meet the same requirements as
the Balilla class. It was a single-hull type
with saddle main ballast tanks. As deliv-
ered it featured a very long conning tower
that carried the shielded 120mm gun on
a platform forward and incorporated a
seaplane hangar at its after end. The sea-
plane never materialized, and the boat’s
conning tower was rebuilt in 1931 with-
out the hangar and with an unshielded
gun. This submarine’s speed was lower
than designed, and it was slow to dive. It
undertook offensive patrols at the start of
World War II but suffered a battery ex-
plosion in October 1940, was laid up the
following March, and scrapped in 1946.228 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: ITA LY

BRAGADIN CLASS (1929)

Marcantonio Bragadin (21 July 1929), Fi l-
ippo Corridoni (30 March 1930)
B u i l d e r : Tosi
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 965 tons (surfaced), 1068
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 235970 x 20920 x 16940
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Tosi diesel engines, 2
Marelli electric motors, 2 shafts. 1500
bhp/1000 shp = 11.5/7 knots
R a n g e : 9000 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 72
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 6 torpedoes, 24 mines, 1 x
102mm gun, 2 x twin 13.2mm machine
guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 55
N o t e s : This was a Bernardis design for a
single-hull submarine minelayer with
saddle main ballast tanks. As delivered,
their performance was not entirely satis-
f a c t o r y, and they received higher bows
and had their sterns rebuilt with the
mine tubes discharging at the extreme aft
end of the hull. They operated primarily
on supply runs to North Africa during
World War II, were surrendered to the Al-
lies in 1943, and were stricken on 1 Feb-
ruary 1948.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: ITA LY 229

I TA LY: B A N D I E R A CLASS, LUCIANO MANARA ( 1 9 2 9 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Fratelli Bandiera (7 August 1929), Luciano
Manara (5 October 1929)
B u i l d e r : CDT
Santorre Santarosa (22 October 1929), Ciro
Menotti (29 December 1929)
B u i l d e r : Muggiano
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 925 tons (surfaced), 1080
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 212990 x 22930 x 16900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Tosi (Muggiano boats: Fiat)
diesel engines, 2 Savigliano electric mo-
tors, 2 shafts. 3000 bhp/1300 shp = 15/8
knots
R a n g e : 4750 nm at 8.5 knots surfaced, 60
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 4 stern), total 12 torpedoes, 1 x
102mm gun, 2 x 13.2mm machine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 53
N o t e s : This Bernardis design was closely
related to his contemporary minelayer
type and was essentially an enlarged ver-
sion of the Pisani class. They undertook
offensive patrols during World War II un-
til the end of 1941, when they switched
to supply runs to North Africa. The San-
torre Santarosa continued on these duties
until it ran aground near Tripoli on 19
January 1943 and was scuttled the fol-
lowing day. The other boats became
training units from September 1943 and
were stricken on 1 February 1948.230 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: ITA LY

S Q U A L O CLASS (1930)

S q u a l o (15 January 1930), N a r v a l o ( 1 5
March 1930), D e l f i n o (27 April 1930),
Tricheco (11 September 1930)
B u i l d e r : Monfalcone
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 920 tons (surfaced), 1125
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 212990 x 22900 x 159100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Fiat diesel engines, 2 CRDA
electric motors, 2 shafts. 3000 bhp/1300
shp = 15/8 knots
R a n g e : 4750 nm at 8.5 knots surfaced, 60
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 4 stern), total 12 torpedoes, 1 x
102mm gun, 2 x 13.2mm machine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 55
N o t e s : These boats were almost exact re-
peats of the earlier Bandiera class. The
Delﬁno and the Squalo received a smaller
conning tower in late 1942 to reduce
their silhouette on the surface. The sub-
marine Upholder torpedoed the Tricheco
off Brindisi on 18 March 1942; the de-
stroyers Hursley and Pakenham sank the
Narvalo near Tripoli on 14 January 1943;
and the Delﬁno was lost in a training ac-
cident at Taranto on 23 March 1943.
The S q u a l o was stricken on 1 Fe b r u a r y
1948.

[ R O M A N I A ] —D E L F I N U L (22 JUNE 1930)

B u i l d e r : Fiume
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 650 tons (surfaced), 900
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 223910 x 19940 x 119100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Sulzer diesel engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 800 bhp/800
shp = 14/9 knots
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 4 stern), total 12 torpedoes, 1 x
102mm gun, 2 x 13.2mm machine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 55
N o t e s : Romania required many correc-
tions to the Delﬁnul before accepting its
ﬁrst submarine almost ﬁve years after its
completion in 1931. It operated against
Soviet shipping in the Black Sea during
the early part of World War II but was
under reﬁt from July 1942. It was taken
over by the Soviets as the T S - 3 in Sep-
tember 1944, returned to Romania in
1951, and stricken in 1957.

S E T T E M B R I N I CLASS (1930)

Luigi Settembrini (28 September 1930),
Ruggiero Settimo (29 March 1931)
B u i l d e r : Tosi
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 938 tons (surfaced), 1135
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 226960 x 21980 x 14970
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Tosi diesel engines, 2
Ansaldo electric motors, 2 shafts. 3000
bhp/1400 shp = 17.5/7.75 knots
R a n g e : 9000 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 80
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 4 stern), total 12 torpedoes, 1 x
102mm gun, 2 x 13.2mm machine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 56
N o t e s : This was an improved version of
C a v a l l i n i ’s design for the M a m e l i c l a s s
that corrected their instability issues.
They operated extensively during Wo r l d
War II. The destroyer escort Fr a m e n t
sank the Luigi Settembrini in error in the
western Atlantic on 15 November 1944;
the Ruggiero Settimo was stricken on 23
March 1947.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: ITA LY 231

“ 6 0 0 - T O N N E ” TYPE (GROUP I) (1931)

A r g o n a u t a (19 January 1931), Fi s a l i a ( 2
May 1931), Medusa (10 December 1931)
B u i l d e r : Monfalcone
Serpente (28 February 1932), Salpa (8 May
1932)
B u i l d e r : Tosi
Ja n t i n a (16 May 1932), Ja l a e (15 June 1932)
B u i l d e r : Muggiano
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 650 tons (surfaced), 800
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 201990 x 18980 x 15950
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 1200 bhp/800 shp =
14/8 knots
R a n g e : 5000 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 74
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern), total 12 torpedoes, 1 x
102mm gun, 2 x 13.2mm machine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 44
N o t e s : Bernardis developed this “6 0 0 -
t o n n e” design as a diminutive of his
earlier single-hull boats with saddle main
ballast tanks. They proved to be a very ef-
fective type for Mediterranean service
and operated continuously during Wo r l d
War II. The M e d u s a and the S e r p e n t e
were ﬁtted with smaller conning towers in
late 1941 to reduce their silhouette on
the surface.
A British flying boat sank the A r g-
o n a u t a in the eastern Mediterranean on
28 June 1940. The submarine Tr i u m p h
torpedoed the S a l p a off Sollum on 27
June 1941; the submarine To r b a y t o r p e-
doed the Jantina in the Aegean on 5 July;
the corvette H y a c i n t h sank the Fi s a l i a
near Haifa on 28 September. The subma-
rine Thorn torpedoed the Medusa in the
Adriatic on 20 January 1942; the S e r-
pente was scuttled at Ancona on 12 Sep-
tember 1943 after Italy’s surrender; the
Jalae was stricken on 1 February 1948.

[ T U R K E Y ] —S A K A RYA (2 FEBRUARY 1931)

B u i l d e r : CDT
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 710 tons (surfaced), 940
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 196900 x 22940 x 13900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 1600 bhp/1100 shp
= 17/9.5 knots
R a n g e : 5000 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 74
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern), total 12 torpedoes, 1 x
100mm gun, 1 x 20mm AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 41
N o t e s : Bernardis designed this boat as a
modest enlargement of his “6 0 0 - t o n n e”
type to accommodate more powerful ma-
chinery for higher speed. It was discarded
in 1950.232 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: ITA LY

[ A R G E N T I N A ] —S A N TA FE CLASS (1931)

Santa Fe (28 July 1931), Salta (17 January
1932), Santiago del Estero (28 March
1932)
B u i l d e r : Tosi
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 775 tons (surfaced), 920
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 227910 x 21980 x 16960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Tosi diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 3000 bhp/1400 shp
= 17.5/9 knots
R a n g e : 3500 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 65
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 210 torpedo tubes (4 bow, 2
stern), total 10 torpedoes, 1 x 40 gun, 1 x
37mm AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 40
N o t e s : These boats were a further enlarge-
ment of the Bernardis type for export.
They were stricken between 1959 and
1961.

I TA LY: “600-TONNE” TYPE (GROUPS II – IV) (1933), D E S S I E ( 1 9 3 6 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

S i r e n a (26 January 1933), N a i a d e ( 2 7
March 1933), N e r e i d e (25 May 1933),
Anﬁtrite (5 August 1933), Galatea (5 Oc-
tober 1933), Ondina (2 December 1933),
Pe r l a (3 May 1936), G e m m a (21 May
1936), Berillo (14 June 1936), Diaspro (5
July 1936), Tu r c h e s e (19 July 1936),
Corallo (2 August 1936), Adua (13 Sep-
tember 1936), A r a d a m (18 October
1936), Axum (27 September 1936), Alagi
(15 November 1936)
B u i l d e r : Monfalcone
D i a m a n t e (21 May 1933), S m e r a l d a ( 2 3
July 1933), D a g a b u r (22 NovemberA WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: ITA LY 233

1936), Dessie (22 November 1936), Uar-
sciek (19 September 1937), Uebi Scebeli
(3 October 1937)
B u i l d e r : Tosi
Rubino (29 March 1933), Topazio (15 May
1933)
B u i l d e r : Fiume
A m e t i s t a (26 April 1933), Z e f f i r o (26 June
1933), Ambra (28 May 1936), Onice (15
June 1936), M a l a c h i t e (15 July 1936),
I r i d e (30 July 1936), M a c a l l é (29 Octo-
ber 1936), G o n d a r (3 October 1937),
Neghelli (7 November 1937), A s c i a n g h i
(5 December 1937), S c i r e (6 January
1938), Te m b i e n (6 February 1938),
D u r b o (6 March 1938), Lafolé (10 A p r i l
1938), Beilul (22 May 1938), [Brazil]—
Tu p i (28 November 1936), Ti m b i r a ( 3 0
December 1936), Ta m o i o (14 Fe b r u a r y
1937)
B u i l d e r : Muggiano
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 680 tons (surfaced), 837
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 197960 x 21920 x 15950
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 1200 bhp/800 shp =
14/7.75 knots
R a n g e : 5000 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 74
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern), total 12 torpedoes, 1 x
100mm gun, 2 x single or twin 13.2mm
machine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 45
N o t e s : The boats were repeats of
B e r n a r d i s ’s “6 0 0 - t o n n e” design with mi-
nor changes. The A d u a, the A l a g i, the
Ambra, the Ametista, the Corallo, the Di-
a s p r o, the G o n d a r, the M a l a c h i t e, the
N e r e i d e, the O n d i n a, the O n i c e, the
Perla, the Scire, the Sirena, the Tembien,
the Topazio, the Turchese, and the Zefﬁro
were fitted with smaller conning towers
in late 1941 to reduce their silhouette on
the surface. The Ambra, the Gondar, the
I r i d e, and the S c i r e were modified in
1940 to carry three to four “human tor-
pedoes” (operated by divers who attached
the warhead to its target) in canisters
fore and aft of the conning tower.
The I r i d e and the O n i c e were trans-
ferred to the Spanish Nationalist Navy as
the Gonzalez Lopez and the A q u i l a r
Ta b l a d a in 1937. They operated with
their original Italian crews and were re-
turned to Italy in 1938.
The M a c a l l é was wrecked in the Red
Sea on 15 June 1940; the submarine
Parthian torpedoed the Diamante off To-
bruk on 20 June; British aircraft sank the
Rubino in the Ionian Sea on 29 June; and
the destroyers D a i n t y and I l e x sank the
Uebi Scebeli southwest of Crete the same
day; carrier aircraft torpedoed the I r i d e
near Tobruk on 22 August; the Australian
destroyers D i a m o n d and S t u a r t sank the
G o n d a r near Alexandria on 30 Septem-
ber; the destroyers H a v o c k and H a s t y
sank the Berillo off the Egyptian coast on
2 October; the Italian submarine
Tricheco torpedoed the G e m m a in error
on 6 October; the destroyers Fi r e d r a k e
and W r e s t l e r sank the D u r b o east of
Gibraltar on 18 October; the destroyers
G a l l a n t, G r i f f i n, and Hotspur sank the
L a f o l é near Melilla on 20 October; the
destroyers H e r e w a r d and H y p e r i o n s a n k
the Naiade off the Cyrenaican coast on
14 December.
The destroyer G r e y h o u n d sank the
Neghelli in the eastern Mediterranean on
19 January 1941 and the Anﬁtrite in the
Aegean on 6 March; the cruiser
Hermione rammed and sank the Tembien
off Tunis on 2 August; the destroyers
Ghurka and Legion sank the Adua off the
Algerian coast on 30 September; the
S m e r a l d o probably was mined in the
Strait of Sicily the same month. British
aircraft sank the Z e f f i r o off the A l g e r i a n234 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: ITA LY

coast on 9 June 1942; the South African
escort vessels Protea and Southern Maid
sank the Ondina off Beirut on 11 July;
the destroyer Wo l v e r i n e rammed and
sank the D a g a b u r off Algiers on 12 A u-
gust; the destroyers Q u e n t i n a n d
Quiberon sank the Dessie off Bone on 28
November; the sloop E n c h a n t r e s s s a n k
the Corallo in the western Mediterranean
on 13 December; the destroyer Pe t a r d
and the Greek destroyer Vasilissa Olga
sank the Uarsciek south of Malta on 15
December.
The Dutch submarine D o l f i j n t o r p e-
doed the Malachite off Sardinia on 9 Feb-
ruary 1943; the destroyers Echo and Ilex
sank the Nereide off Augusta on 13 July;
the destroyers E c l i p s e and L a f o r e y s a n k
the A s c i a n g h i off Sicily on 23 July;
British aircraft sank the Topazio in error
off Sardinia on 12 September. The A m-
b r a, the A m e t i s t a, the A x u m, and the
Sirena were scuttled in 1943 after Italy’s
s u r r e n d e r. The A r a d a m and the B e i l u l
were seized by the Germans in Septem-
ber 1943, and the latter was sunk at
Monfalcone during an air raid in May
1944. The surviving boats were stricken
in 1947–1948.
The Brazilian boats were originally the
A s c i a n g h i, the G o n d a r, and the N e g h e l l i
for the Italian ﬂeet (the names were used
for new boats ordered in their place).
They served actively until discarded in
1960.

A R C H I M E D E CLASS (1933)

A r c h i m e d e (10 December 1933), G a l i l e o
Galilei (19 March 1934), Evangelista Tor-
r i c e l l i (27 May 1934), Galileo Fe r r a r i s
(11 August 1934)
B u i l d e r : Tosi
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 970 tons (surfaced), 1239
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 231940 x 22960 x 13960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Tosi diesel engines, 2
Marelli electric motors, 2 shafts. 3000
bhp/1100 shp = 17/8 knots
R a n g e : 10,500 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 105
nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 4 stern), total 16 torpedoes, 2 x
100mm guns, 2 x 13.2mm machine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 55
N o t e s : This Cavallini design essentially
was an enlarged version of his earlier Set-
t e m b r i n i class of single hull boats with
saddle main ballast tanks. Larger size en-
dowed these submarines with greater
range and reloads for all tubes. They
served in the Red Sea and Indian and At-
lantic oceans
The A r c h i m e d e and the E v a n g e l i s t a
Torricelli were transferred secretly to the
Spanish Nationalist Navy in 1937. Re-
named the General Sanjurjo and the
General Mola, they were stricken in
1959.
The trawler M o o n s t o n e captured the
Galileo Galilei in the Red Sea on 19 June
1940. It was commissioned in the Royal
Navy as the X-2 and operated as a train-
ing vessel until it was scrapped in 1946.
The destroyer Lamerson sank the Galileo
Ferraris in the Bay of Biscay on 25 Octo-
ber 1941.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: ITA LY 235

G L A U C O CLASS (1935)

Glauco (5 January 1935), Otaria (20 March
1935)
B u i l d e r : Monfalcone
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1054 tons (surfaced),
1305 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 239960 x 23930 x 169100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Fiat diesel engines, 2 CRDA
electric motors, 2 shafts. 3000 bhp/1200
shp = 17/8 knots
R a n g e : 10,500 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 105
nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 4 stern), total 14 torpedoes, 2 x
100mm guns, 2 x 13.2mm machine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 55
N o t e s : Bernardis designed these sub-
marines for Portugal, which ordered
them as the Delﬁn and Espadarte in 1931
but canceled the order soon afterward. In
1932, Italy took them over for comple-
tion. They served in the North A t l a n t i c
until mid-1941, when the O t a r i a t r a n s-
ferred to the Mediterranean, undertaking
both offensive patrols and supply runs to
North Africa. The destroyer Wishart sank
the G l a u c o near Gibraltar on 27 June
1941. The Otaria was stricken on 1 Feb-
ruary 1948.

PIETRO MICCA (31 MARCH 1935)

B u i l d e r : Tosi
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1545 tons (surfaced),
1940 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 296930 x 25930 x 17950
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Tosi diesel engines, 2
Marelli electric motors, 2 shafts. 3000
bhp/1150 shp = 15.5/8.5 knots
R a n g e : 12,000 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 80
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern), total 10 torpedoes, 20
mines, 2 x 120mm guns, 2 x twin
13.2mm machine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 72
N o t e s : Cavallini designed this single-hull
submarine with saddle main ballast tanks
as a cruiser-minelayer. It was the largest
Italian submarine before World War II
and a very satisfactory design. It under-
took minelaying operations and switched
to supply runs to North Africa from early
1941. The submarine Tr o o p e r t o r p e d o e d
the Pietro Micca in the Straits of Otranto
on 29 July 1943.236 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: ITA LY

C A LV I CLASS (1935)

Pietro Calvi (31 March 1935), G i u s e p p e
Finzi (29 June 1935), Enrico Tazzoli (14
October 1935)
B u i l d e r : Muggiano
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1525 tons (surfaced),
2028 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 276970 x 25930 x 17910
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Fiat diesel engines, 2 San
Giorgio electric motors, 2 shafts. 4400
bhp/1800 shp = 17/8 knots
R a n g e : 13,400 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 80
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 4 stern), total 16 torpedoes, 2 x
120mm guns, 2 x twin 13.2mm machine
guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 77
N o t e s : These double-hull submarines were
an improved version of the Balilla class.
They had less powerful machinery and
used the extra displacement as space to
fit two additional stern torpedo tubes, a
further 120mm deck gun, and stowage
for additional fuel oil. Improved hull
lines compensated for the lower power
and gave them an almost identical per-
formance. They operated extensively in
the North Atlantic during World War II.
The sloop L u l w o r t h sank the P i e t r o
C a l v i in the Atlantic on 15 July, and a
British aircraft probably sank the Enrico
Ta z z o l i in the Bay of Biscay on 16 May
1943. German forces seized the Giuseppe
Fi n z i in September 1943 and commis-
sioned it as the UIT-21. After a series of
operations in the North Atlantic, it was
scuttled at Bordeaux on 20 August 1944.

F O C A CLASS (1937)

Fo c a (26 June 1937), Z o e a (5 December
1937), Atropo (20 November 1938)
B u i l d e r : Tosi
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1305 tons (surfaced),
1625 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 2719100 x 23960 x 17910
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Fiat diesel engines, 2
Ansaldo electric motors, 2 shafts. 2880
bhp/1250 shp = 16/8 knots
R a n g e : 8500 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 106
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 8 torpedoes, 36 mines, 1 x
100mm gun, 2 x twin 13.2mm machine
guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 60
N o t e s : Cavallini designed this class as
minelaying versions of his G l a u c o t y p e .
They operated extensively on minelaying
missions in the Mediterranean during
World War II.
The Fo c a failed to return from a
minelaying operation off Haifa in Octo-
ber 1940. The two surviving boats were
stricken on 23 March 1947.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: ITA LY 237

M A R C E L L O CLASS (1937)

Marcello (20 November 1937), Dandolo (20
November 1937), Mocenigo (20 Novem-
ber 1937), N a n i (16 January 1938), Ve-
n i e r o (12 February 1938), P r o v a n a ( 1 6
March 1938), Barbarigo (13 June 1938),
E m o (26 June 1938), M o r o s i n i (28 July
1938)
B u i l d e r : Monfalcone
Commandante Cappellini (14 May 1939),
Commandante Faa di Bruno (18 June
1939)
B u i l d e r : Muggiano
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1054 tons (surfaced),
1305 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 239960 x 23970 x 16980
M a c h i n e r y : 2 CRDA or Fiat diesel en-
gines, 2 CRDA electric motors, 2 shafts.
3600 bhp/1100 shp = 17.5/8 knots
R a n g e : 7500 nm at 9.5 knots surfaced, 120
nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 4 stern), total 16 torpedoes, 2 x
100mm guns, 2 x twin 13.2mm machine
guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 57
N o t e s : The Bernardis design for these
submarines added a partial double-hull
section amidships containing the main
ballast tanks, with supplemental saddle
ballast tanks outside them. They were
very maneuverable and dived quickly but
suffered from some instability problems,
largely a result of their large conning
towers. They served extensively in the
Mediterranean and North Atlantic during
World War II. The B a r b a r i g o and the
Commandante Cappellini were reconﬁg-
ured as transport submarines in 1943 to
bring rubber from the Far East through
the Allied blockade.
The French sloop La Curieuse
rammed and sank the P r o v a n a off Oran
on 17 June 1940, and the Commandante
Faa di Bruno failed to return from an op-
eration in the North Atlantic in October.
The corvette A n e m o n e sank the N a n i i n
the North Atlantic on 7 January 1941,
and convoy escorts sank the M a r c e l l o
there on 22 Fe b r u a r y. Aircraft sank the
Veniero in the western Mediterranean on
7 June 1942 and the Morosini in the Bay
of Biscay on 11 August; the trawler Lord
N u f ﬁe l d sank the E m o off Algiers on 10
November. The Mocenigo was sunk dur-
ing an air raid on Cagliari on 13 May
1943, and aircraft sank the Barbarigo in
the Bay of Biscay at the end of June.
The Commandante Cappellini w a s
seized by the Japanese at Sabang after
I t a l y ’s surrender in September 1943,
handed over to Germany, and became the
U I T- 2 4. After Germany’s collapse it be-
came the Japanese I-503 and was surren-
dered at Kobe on 2 September 1945 to
the United States, which scuttled the
submarine offshore on 15 April 1946.
The D a n d o l o survived the war and was
stricken on 23 March 1947.238 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: ITA LY

B R I N CLASS (1938)

B r i n (3 April 1938), G a l v a n i (22 May
1938), G u g l i e l m o t t i (5 March 1939),
Archimede (5 March 1939), Torricelli (26
March 1939)
B u i l d e r : Tosi
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1000 tons (surfaced),
1245 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 237980 x 219110 x 149110
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Tosi diesel engines, 2
Ansaldo electric motors, 2 shafts. 3400
bhp/1300 shp = 17.25/8 knots
R a n g e : 10,500 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 105
nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 4 stern), total 14 torpedoes, 1 x
120mm gun, 4 x 13.2mm machine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 58
N o t e s : This Cavallini design was an im-
proved version of his A r c h i m e d e c l a s s .
The two final units were ordered to
replace the boats transferred surrepti-
tiously to Spanish Nationalist forces and
used the same names to preserve the se-
cret. They served widely in the Red Sea,
Mediterranean, and Atlantic during
World War II.
The destroyers K a n d a h a r, K h a r t o u m,
and K i n g s t o n and the sloop S h o r e h a m
sank the Torricelli in the Red Sea on 23
June 1940, and the sloop Falmouth sank
the G a l v a n i in the Persian Gulf the fol-
lowing day. The submarine Unbeaten tor-
pedoed the G u g l i e l m o t t i off Calabria on
17 March 1942, and a U.S. flying boat
sank the Archimede off the coast of Brazil
on 16 April 1943. The Brin surrendered
after Italy’s collapse and operated as a
training vessel in 1944–1945. It was
stricken on 1 February 1948.

LIUZZI CLASS (1939)

Console Generale Liuzzi (17 September
1939), Alpino Bagnolini (28 October
1939), Reginaldo Giuliani (3 December
1939), Capitano Ta r a n t i n i (7 January
1940)
B u i l d e r : Tosi
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1148 tons (surfaced),
1460 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 249980 x 229110 x 149110
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Tosi diesel engines, 2
Ansaldo electric motors, 2 shafts. 2500
bhp/1500 shp = 18/8 knots
R a n g e : 10,500 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 105
nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 4 stern), total 12 torpedoes, 1 x
100mm gun, 2 x twin 13.2mm machine
guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 58
N o t e s : This class was a further improve-
ment on Cavallini’s previous B r i n t y p e
with more powerful machinery and a
lighter deck gun. They operated in the
Mediterranean and North Atlantic on of-
fensive patrols. The Alpino Bagnolini and
the Reginaldo Giuliani were converted
into transport submarines in 1943 to
bring rubber from the Far East.
The destroyers D a r i n g, D e f e n d e r, and
I l e x sank the Console Generale Liuzzi
near Crete on 27 June 1940, and the
submarine T h u n d e r b o l t torpedoed the
Capitano Ta r a n t i n i in the Bay of Biscay
on 15 December. The two transport sub-
marines became the German UIT-22 and
UIT-23, respectively, in September 1943.
The submarine Tally Ho torpedoed the
UIT-23 in the Malacca Straits on 14 Feb-
ruary 1944, and a South African flying
boat sank the U I T- 2 2 off the Cape of
Good Hope on 11 March.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: ITA LY 239

I TA LY: M A R C O N I CLASS, LEONARDO DA VINCI ( 1 9 3 9 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Guglielmo Marconi (30 July 1939),
Leonardo da Vinci (16 September 1939)
B u i l d e r : Monfalcone
Michele Bianchi (3 December 1939), Luigi
To r e l l i (6 January 1940), A l e s s a n d r o
Malaspina (18 February 1940), Maggiore
Baracca (21 April 1940)
B u i l d e r : Muggiano
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1175 tons (surfaced),
1465 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 251900 x 22940 x 15960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 CRDA diesel engines, 2
Marelli electric motors, 2 shafts. 3600
bhp/1500 shp = 17.75/8.25 knots
R a n g e : 10,500 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 110
nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 4 stern), total 12 torpedoes, 1 x
100mm gun, 2 x twin 13.2mm machine
guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 57
N o t e s : Bernardis developed this class as an
improvement on his earlier M a r c e l l o
design. It had more powerful machinery,
a reduced gun armament, and a smaller
conning tower. They operated primarily
in the North Atlantic during World Wa r
II. The Luigi To r e l l i was converted to a
transport submarine in 1943 to carry
rubber from the Far East.
The submarine Ti g r i s torpedoed the
Michele Bianchi in the Bay of Biscay on
5 July 1941; the destroyer C r o o m e
rammed and sank the Maggiore Baracca
west of Gibraltar on 8 September; and
the Alessandro Malaspina and Guglielmo
M a r c o n i failed to return from North A t-
lantic patrols in September and October,
respectively. The Luigi Torelli became the
German UIT-25 in September 1943 and
was seized by Japan as the I-504 in May
1945. It was surrendered at Kobe on 2
September 1945 and was scuttled off-
shore in April 1946.240 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: ITA LY

C A G N I CLASS (1940)

Ammiraglio Saint-Bon (6 June 1940), A m m i-
raglio Cagni (20 July 1949), A m m i r a g l i o
M i l l o (31 August 1940), A m m i r a g l i o
C a r a c c i o l o (16 October 1940)
B u i l d e r : Monfalcone
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1653 tons (surfaced),
2136 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 288950 x 25950 x 18990
M a c h i n e r y : 2 CRDA diesel engines, 2
C R DA electric motors, 2 shafts. 4370
bhp/1800 shp = 17/8.5 knots
R a n g e : 13,500 nm at 9 knots surfaced, 110
nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 14 x 450mm torpedo tubes (8
b o w, 6 stern), total 36 torpedoes, 2 x
100mm guns, 2 x twin 13.2mm machine
guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 85
N o t e s : This class was designed for very-
long-range antishipping operations. The
boats carried a very large battery of
smaller torpedoes to enhance their
suitability for the mission. While under
construction they were fitted with
smaller conning towers to reduce their
silhouette when on the surface. Initially
they operated as transport submarines
carrying supplies to North Africa, a role
for which they were unsuited. The Ammi-
raglio Cagni then was deployed as de-
signed and undertook some very long pa-
trols in the South Atlantic that lasted as
much as 135 days.
The destroyer Fa r n d a l e sank the A m-
miraglio Caracciola near Bardia on 11
December 1941; the submarine U p-
holder torpedoed the Ammiraglio Saint-
B o n off Sicily on 5 January 1942; the
submarine Ultimatum torpedoed the Am-
miraglio Millo in the Ionian Sea on 14
March. The Ammiraglio Cagni s u r r e n-
dered to the Allies in September 1943
and was employed as a training vessel un-
til 1944. It was stricken on 1 Fe b r u a r y
1948.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: ITA LY 241

I TA LY: ”600-TONNE“ TYPE (GROUP V) (1941), N I C H E L I O ( 1 9 4 2 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

P l a t i n o (1 June 1941), A c c i a i o (20 July
1941), C o b a l t o (20 July 1941), N i c h e l i o
(12 April 1942)
B u i l d e r : Muggiano
A s t e r i a (25 June 1941), G i a d a (10 July
1941), G r a n i t o (7 August 1941), Po r ﬁd o
(23 August 1941), Av o r i o (6 September
1941), Alabastro (18 December 1941)
B u i l d e r : Monfalcone
B r o n z o (28 September 1941), Vo l f r a m i o ( 9
November 1941), A r g e n t o (22 Fe b r u a r y
1942)
B u i l d e r : Tosi
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 697 tons (surfaced), 850
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 197960 x 21920 x 15980
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Fiat (Tosi boats: Tosi) diesel
engines, 2 CRDA (Tosi boats: A n s a l d o )
electric motors, 2 shafts. 1400 (Tosi
boats: 1600) bhp/800 shp = 14 (Tosi boats
14.75)/7.75 knots
R a n g e : 5000 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 74
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 (Tosi boats: 4) x 533mm tor-
pedo tubes (4 bow, 2 stern), total 12 tor-
pedoes, 1 x 100mm gun, 2 x single or
twin 13.2mm machine guns or 1–2 x
20mm AA guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 45
N o t e s : This was the final series of
B e r n a r d i s ’s “600-tonne” type. They had
more powerful machinery and smaller
conning towers to reduce their silhouette
on the surface. They operated mainly in
the Mediterranean during World War II.
The destroyer Ithuriel rammed and
sank the Cobalto off Bizerta on 12 August
1942; a British aircraft sank the Alabastro242 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: ITA LY

off the Algerian coast on 14 September;
the submarine S a r a c e n torpedoed the
G r a n i t o near Sicily on 9 November; the
submarine Ti g r i s torpedoed the Po r f i d o
off Bone on 6 December. The Canadian
corvette Regina sank the Avorio o f f
Bougie on 8 February 1943; the destroy-
ers Easton and Wheatland sank the Aste-
ria in the same area on 17 February; the
submarine Unruly torpedoed the Acciaio
in the Straits of Messina on 13 July; the
destroyer Buck sank the Argento south of
Sicily on 3 August. The Vo l f r a m i o w a s
scuttled at La Spezia on 8 September
1943, raised by the Germans, and sunk
in an air raid on the port in September
1944.
Four British minesweepers captured
the Bronzo on 12 July 1943. It was com-
missioned as the P - 7 1 4 in the Royal
Navy, then transferred as a training vessel
to France as the Narval, and scrapped in
1948. The Platino was stricken on 1 Feb-
ruary 1948, and the N i c h e l i o was ceded
to the Soviet Union in February 1949 as
the S-41 and stricken in the mid-1950s.
The G i a d a was retained by the Italian
Navy. It was rebuilt as a training vessel in
1951–1953 and finally discarded on 1
January 1966.

F L U T T O CLASS (1942)

Tritone (3 January 1942), Gorgo (31 January
1942), F l u t t o (19 November 1942),
M a r e a (10 December 1942), Vo r t i c e ( 2 3
February 1943), N a u t i l o (20 March
1943), Bario (23 January 1944), Litio (19
February 1944), Sodio (16 March 1944)
B u i l d e r : Monfalcone
S p a r i d e (21 February 1943), M u r e n a ( 1 1
April 1943), Grongo (6 May 1943)
B u i l d e r : Muggiano
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 930 tons (surfaced), 1093
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 207940 x 229110 x 16900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Fiat diesel engines, 2 CRDA
electric motors, 2 shafts. 2400 bhp/800
shp = 16/8 knots
R a n g e : 5400 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 80
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern), total 12 torpedoes, 1 x
100mm gun, 2 x 20mm AA guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 50
N o t e s : Bernardis improved his “600-tonne”
design for this class by enlarging it to
accommodate more powerful machinery,
additional torpedo reloads, and modiﬁc a-
tions to enhance diving and underwater
handling. Three additional boats were in-
complete in September 1943 when the
Allies concluded an armistice with Italy.
The destroyer Antelope and the Cana-
dian corvette Port Arthur sank the Tritone
near Bougie on 19 January 1943; the de-
stroyer Nields sank the Gorgo off the Al-
gerian coast on 21 May; British motor
torpedo boats sank the F l u t t o in the
Straits of Messina on 11 July. The Nau-
t i l o was scuttled at Venice, and the
Grongo, the Murena, and the Sparide at
La Spezia in September 1943. German
forces refloated them and designated
them the U I T- 1 9, the U I T- 2 0, the U I T-
16, and the UIT-15, respectively. All were
sunk again in port by Allied air raids in
January and September 1944.
The U I T- 1 9 was salved and commis-
sioned as the Yugoslavian Sava. Between
1958 and 1960 it underwent a majorA WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: ITA LY 243

reconstruction, surrendering its deck gun
and gaining a streamlined sail and then
became a training vessel until it was
stricken in 1971.
The M a r e a was ceded to the Soviet
Union on 7 February 1949 as the S - 4 3
and stricken in the mid-1950s. The Vor-
t i c e was retained by the Italian Navy. It
was rebuilt as a training vessel in
1950–1952 and finally discarded on 1
August 1967.

R O M O L O CLASS (1943)

Romolo (21 March 1943), Remo (28 March
1943), R-3 (7 September 1946), R-4 (30
September 1946)
B u i l d e r : Tosi
R-7 (21 October 1943), R-8 (28 December
1943), R-9 (27 February 1944)
B u i l d e r : Monfalcone
R-10 (12 July 1944), R-11 (6 August 1944),
R-12 (29 September 1944)
B u i l d e r : Muggiano
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2155 tons (surfaced),
2560 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 2839100 x 25990 x 17960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Tosi diesel engines, 2
Marelli electric motors, 2 shafts. 2600
bhp/900 shp = 14/6.5 knots
R a n g e : 12,000 nm at 9 knots surfaced, 90
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 450mm torpedo tubes
(bow), 3 x 20mm AA guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 63
N o t e s : Cavallini designed these large sin-
gle hull submarines with saddle ballast
tanks as transports to carry high-priority
cargoes, especially rubber, from the Fa r
East. They could carry 600 tons of cargo.
Two additional hulls (the R - 5 and R - 6)
were never launched at the Tosi yard, and
only two boats were ever delivered com-
plete for service.
The submarine U n i t e d torpedoed the
R e m o on 15 July 1943 in the Gulf of
Taranto, and Allied aircraft sank the Ro-
molo off Augusta on 18 July. The Ger-
mans seized the R-7 through the R-12 in
September 1943 as the U I T- 4 t h r o u g h
the U I T- 6 and the U I T- 1 through the
U I T- 3 , r e s p e c t i v e l y. Allied air raids on
Monfalcone sank the UIT-4 through the
U I T- 6 , and the other three boats were
scuttled in April 1945. The R - 3 and the
R-4 were broken up incomplete in 1947.244 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: JAPA N

J A PA N
TYPE K D 1, NO. 44 ( 1 9 2 1 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

No. 44 (29 November 1921)
B u i l d e r : Kure
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1500 tons (surfaced),
2430 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 300900 x 289100 x 15910
M a c h i n e r y : 4 diesel engines, 4 electric
motors, 4 shafts. 5200 bhp/2000 shp =
20/10 knots
R a n g e : 20,000 nm at 10 knots surfaced,
100 nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 24 torpedoes, 1 x 4.70 gun, 1 x 30 AA
gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 60
N o t e s : This submarine’s design was based
on the British J class enlarged to accom-
modate an extra engine and shaft for high
surface speed and very long range. It was
partially reconstructed in 1932 with two
engines and shafts only.
In 1924 it became the I - 5 1. It was
largely an experimental boat and was
used for training from 1930 to 1939. The
I-51 was stricken in 1941.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: JAPA N 245

TYPE KD2 (1922)

No. 51 (12 June 1922)
B u i l d e r : Kure
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1500 tons (surfaced),
2500 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 3309100 x 25910 x 169100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 6800 bhp/2000 shp =
22/10 knots
R a n g e : 10,000 nm at 10 knots surfaced,
100 nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 210 torpedo tubes (6 bow,
2 stern), total 16 torpedoes, 1 x 4.70 gun,
1 x 30 AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 60
N o t e s : This boat’s design was based on the
German U - 1 3 9 class submarine cruiser
type. Five additional boats were canceled
after the signature of the Wa s h i n g t o n
Tr e a t y. It became the I - 5 2 in 1924 and
the I - 1 5 2 in 1942. It became a training
vessel in 1940, was disarmed in July
1942, and scrapped in 1948.246 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: JAPA N

J A PAN: TYPE J 1 (1924), I - 3 (EX–NO. 76) (1925)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

No. 74 (15 October 1924), No. 75 (23 Feb-
ruary 1925), No. 76 (8 June 1925), I - 4
(22 May 1928)
B u i l d e r : Kawasaki
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2135 tons (surfaced),
2791 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 3199110 x 30930 x 16950
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 6000 bhp/2600 shp
= 18/8 knots
R a n g e : 24,400 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 60
nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 20 torpedoes, 2 x 5.50 guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 92
N o t e s : These large cruiser submarines
were designed with substantial assistance
from German engineers as developed
versions of the Type KD2 with very long
range and heavier deck guns. They were
redesignated the I-1 through the I-4 be-
fore launching.
The P T- 5 9 sank the I - 3 off Guadal-
canal on 10 December 1942, and the
submarine S e a d r a g o n torpedoed the I - 4
off Cape Esperance on 20 December.
The two surviving boats were converted
to transport submarines with the after
gun removed, a reduced torpedo load,
and space to transport a small landing
craft on deck. The New Zealand trawlers
K i w i and M o a sank the I - 1 off Guadal-
canal on 29 January 1943, and the
destroyer Saufley sank the I - 2 off New
Ireland on 7 April 1944.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: JAPA N 247

TYPE KD3A (1925–1926), TYPE KD3B (1927–1929)

No. 64 (5 August 1925), No. 78 (2 Septem-
ber 1925), I-56 (23 March 1928), I-57 (1
October 1928)
B u i l d e r : Kure
I-58 (3 October 1925), I-59 (25 March
1929)
B u i l d e r : Yokosuka
No. 77 (15 March 1926), I-63 (28 Septem-
ber 1927), I-60 (24 April 1929)
B u i l d e r : Sasebo
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1800 tons (surfaced),
2300 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 330900 (Type KD3b: 331940)
x 26920 x 159100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 6800 bhp/1800 shp =
20/8 knots
R a n g e : 10,000 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 90
nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 16 torpedoes, 1 x 4.70 gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 64
N o t e s : These boats were slightly modiﬁed
versions of the Type KD2. The later boats
had raking bows to improve sea-keeping.
The first three boats were redesignated
the I-53 through the I-55 in 1924 before
launching.
The I - 6 0 collided with the I - 6 3 a n d
sank it in Bingo Strait on 2 Fe b r u a r y
1939. The destroyer Jupiter sank the I-60
in Sunda Strait on 17 January 1942. The
surviving boats were redesignated the I -
1 5 3 through the I - 1 5 9 in 1942. They
were surrendered in 1945 and either
scrapped or scuttled.

TYPE KRS (1926)

No. 48 (30 March 1926), No. 49 (8 Novem-
ber 1926), No. 50 (19 March 1927), I-24
(12 December 1927)
B u i l d e r : Kawasaki
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1383 tons (surfaced),
1768 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 279960 x 24980 x 14960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 2400 bhp/1100 shp =
14.5/7 knots
R a n g e : 10,500 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 40
nm at 4.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 12 torpedoes, 42 mines, 1 x 50 gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 70
N o t e s : The German Type UE II minelayer
U-125 served as the basis for the design
of this class. The mines were stowed in a
large compartment at the stern and dis-
charged through two horizontal tubes aft.
In 1924 the early boats were redesig-
nated the I - 2 1 through the I - 2 3 b e f o r e
launching. They were redesignated the I-
121 through the I-124 in 1939 and mod-
ified the following year by adding large
aviation gasoline storage tanks so they
could refuel ﬂying boats.
The destroyer E d s a l l and the A u s-
tralian minesweepers D e l o r a i n e and K a-
toomba sank the I-124 off Darwin on 20
January 1942; the high-speed minelayer
Gamble sank the I-123 off Savo Island on
29 August; and the submarine Skate tor-
pedoed the I - 1 2 2 in Toyama Bay on 10
June 1945. The I-121 was surrendered in
1945 and scrapped.248 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: JAPA N

J A PAN: TYPE K D 4 (1927), I - 6 1 ( 1 9 2 7 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

I-61 (12 November 1927), I-62 (29 Novem-
ber 1928)
B u i l d e r : Mitsubishi
I-64 (5 October 1929)
B u i l d e r : Kure
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1720 tons (surfaced),
2300 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 320960 x 25970 x 159100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 6000 bhp/1800 shp =
20/8.5 knots
R a n g e : 10,800 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 60
nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 14 torpedoes, 1 x 4.70 gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 58
N o t e s : This class was a smaller version of
the previous Type KD3 with two fewer
torpedo tubes. A merchant ship acciden-
tally rammed and sank the I-61 in the Iki
Strait on 2 October 1941. The other two
boats were redesignated the I - 1 6 2 a n d
the I-164 in 1942. The submarine Triton
torpedoed the I-164 off Kagoshima on 17
May 1942, and the I - 1 6 2 was surren-
dered in 1945 and scuttled.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: JAPA N 249

TYPE KD5 (1931)

I-67 (7 April 1931)
B u i l d e r : Mitsubishi
I-65 (2 June 1931)
B u i l d e r : Kure
I-66 (2 June 1931)
B u i l d e r : Sasebo
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1705 tons (surfaced),
2330 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 320960 x 269110 x 15950
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 6000 bhp/1800 shp =
20.5/8.25 knots
R a n g e : 10,800 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 60
nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 14 torpedoes, 1 x 3.90 gun, 1 x
13.2mm machine gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 82
N o t e s : This class was very similar to its
precursor but had a heavier structure to
increase the diving depth. The I - 6 7 w a s
lost in an accident off Marcus Island on
29 August 1940. The other boats became
the I - 1 6 5 and the I - 1 6 6 in 1942. The
submarine Te l e m a c h u s torpedoed the I -
166 near Singapore on 17 July 1944, and
U.S. carrier aircraft sank the I - 1 6 5 e a s t
of Saipan on 27 June 1945.

TYPE J1M (1931)

I-5 (19 June 1931)
B u i l d e r : Kawasaki
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2243 tons (surfaced),
2921 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 3199110 x 29990 x 16920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 6000 bhp/2600 shp =
18/8 knots
R a n g e : 24,400 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 60
nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 20 torpedoes, 1 x 5.50 gun, 1 aircraft
C o m p l e m e n t : 93
N o t e s : The I-5 was a version of the Type J1
enlarged to accommodate two tubular
hangars for a dismantled seaplane and a
launching catapult. The destroyer escort
Wyman sank it east of Guam on 19 July
1944.250 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?

TYPES KD6A (1933) AND KD6B (1936)

I-68 (26 June 1933)
B u i l d e r : Kure
I-69 (15 February 1934), I-72 (20 June
1935), I-75 (16 September 1936)
B u i l d e r : Mitsubishi
I-70 (14 June 1934), I-74 (28 March 1937)
B u i l d e r : Sasebo
I-71 (25 August 1934), I-73 (20 June 1935)
B u i l d e r : Kawasaki
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1785 (Type KD6b: 1810)
tons (surfaced), 2440 (Type KD6b: 2564)
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 344960 x 269110 x 15910
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 9000 bhp/1800 shp =
23/8.25 knots
R a n g e : 14,000 nm at 10 knots (Ty p e
KD6b: 10,000 nm at 16 knots) surfaced,
65 nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 14 torpedoes, 1 x 3.90 (I-71 – I-73:
4 . 70) gun, 1 (Type KD6b: 4) x 13.2mm
machine gun(s)
C o m p l e m e n t : 84
N o t e s : This group of submarines was a fur-
ther development of the KD type, with
higher surface speed, deeper diving
depth, and longer range.
Aircraft from the carrier E n t e r p r i s e
sank the I-70 off Oahu on 10 December
1941, and the submarine Gudgeon torpe-
doed the I-73 east of Midway on 27 Janu-
ary 1942. The remainder of the class be-
came the I - 1 6 8 through the I - 1 7 5 i n
1942. The fast minesweeper S o u t h a r d
sank the I - 1 7 2 near Guadalcanal on 11
November 1942 and the submarine
Scamp torpedoed the I-168 off New Ire-
land on 27 July 1943. The destroyers
G u e s t and Hudson sank the I - 1 7 1 n e a r
Buka Island on 1 February 1944; the de-
stroyer Charette and destroyer escort Fair
sank the I - 1 7 5 off Jaluit on 5 Fe b r u a r y ;
aircraft sank the I-174 on 3 April and the
I-169 the following day at Truk.

TYPE J2 (1934)

I-6 (31 March 1934)
B u i l d e r : Kawasaki
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2243 tons (surfaced),
3061 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 323920 x 29990 x 17950
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 8000 bhp/2600 shp =
20/7.5 knots
R a n g e : 20,000 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 60
nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 17 torpedoes, 1 x 50 DP gun, 1 x
13.2mm machine gun, 1 aircraft
C o m p l e m e n t : 97
N o t e s : The I - 6 was similar to the I - 5 b u t
ﬁtted with a dual-purpose deck gun. The
destroyer escort William C. Miller sank it
off Saipan on 14 July 1944.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: JAPA N 251

TYPE K 5 ( 1 9 3 4 )

RO–33 (10 October 1934)
B u i l d e r : Kure
RO–34
B u i l d e r : Mitsubishi
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 700 tons (surfaced), 940
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 248940 x 22900 x 129110
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 2900 bhp/1200 shp =
19/8.25 knots
R a n g e : 8000 nm at 12 knots surfaced, 90
nm at 3.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 10 torpedoes, 1 x 30 AA gun, 1 x
13.2mm machine gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 42
N o t e s : This class was developed as a proto-
type medium submarine design for mass
production in wartime, emphasizing sur-
face speed and ease of construction. The
Australian destroyer Arunta sank the RO-
3 3 near Port Moresby on 29 A u g u s t
1942, and the destroyers O ’ B a n n o n a n d
Strong sank the RO-34 off Russell Island
on 5 April 1943.

J A PAN: TYPE J 3 , I - 7 ( 1 9 3 5 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

I-7 (3 July 1935)
B u i l d e r : Kure
I-8 (20 July 1936)
B u i l d e r : Kawasaki
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2525 tons (surfaced),
3538 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 358970 x 299100 x 17930
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 11,200 bhp/2800 shp =
23/8 knots
R a n g e : 14,000 nm at 16 knots surfaced, 60
nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 20 torpedoes, 1 x 5.50 gun, 2 x
13.2mm machine guns, 1 aircraft
C o m p l e m e n t : 100
N o t e s : This class was an enlargement of
the Type J2. They were ﬁtted as squadron
flagships. In 1943 one 13.2mm mount
was replaced with a twin 25mm antiair-
craft mount. The I-8 received a twin 5.50
mount in place of its single weapon in
mid-1943 and was converted to a kaiten
carrier in late 1944 by removing the 5.50
weapons, the hangar, and the catapult
and replacing them with cradles for four
human torpedoes.
The destroyer Monaghan sank the I-7
near Kiska on 5 July 1943, and the de-
stroyers M o r r i s o n and S t o c k t o n sank the
I-8 near Okinawa on 31 March 1945.252 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: JAPA N

J A PAN: TYPES C 1 (1938) AND C 2 (1943), I - 1 6 ( 1 9 3 8 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

I-16 (28 July 1938), I-20 (25 January 1939)
B u i l d e r : Mitsubishi
I-18 (12 November 1938), I-24 (12 Novem-
ber 1939), I-46–I-48 (1943)
B u i l d e r : Sasebo
I-22 (23 December 1938)
B u i l d e r : Kawasaki
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2554 tons (surfaced),
3561 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 358970 x 299100 x 17970
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 12,400 bhp/2000 shp =
23.5/8 knots
R a n g e : 14,000 nm at 16 knots surfaced, 60
nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 20 torpedoes, 1 x 5.50 gun, 2 x
25mm AA guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 101
N o t e s : The Imperial Japanese Navy devel-
oped a design for a large long-range sub-
marine in the late 1930s from the Ty p e
J3. Different detail arrangements suited
the design for service as torpedo attack,
scouting, or headquarters submarines.
The C type was the torpedo attack de-
sign, the Type C1 being equipped to carry
a midget submarine as well. Seven addi-
tional Type C2 boats were canceled in
1942–1943.
The I-16 was converted in late 1942 as
a transport submarine capable of carrying
a small landing craft abaft the conning
t o w e r. The I - 4 7 and the I - 4 8 were con-
verted to kaiten carriers in late 1944, los-
ing their deck gun and receiving cradles
for four to six human torpedoes.
The I-22 failed to return from a patrol
in the Solomons in October 1942. The
destroyer F l e t c h e r sank the I - 1 8 off San
Cristobal on 11 February 1943; the sub-
marine chaser PC-487 sank the I-24 nearA WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: JAPA N 253

Attu on 11 June; the I-20 failed to return
from a patrol in the New Hebrides in Oc-
tober. The destroyer escort England sank
the I - 1 6 northeast of Choiseul on 19
May 1944, and the destroyers G r i d l e y
and Helm sank the I-46 off Leyte on 28
O c t o b e r. The destroyer escorts C o n k l i n,
C o r b e s i e r, and R a b y sank the I - 4 8 n e a r
Yap on 23 January 1945, and the I - 4 7
was surrendered in August and scuttled.

NO. 71 ( 1 9 3 8 )

B u i l d e r : Kure
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 213 tons (surfaced), 240
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 140950 x 109100 x 10920
M a c h i n e r y : 1 diesel engine, 2 electric mo-
tors, 1 shaft. 300 bhp/1800 shp =
13/21.25 knots
R a n g e : 2200 nm at 12 knots surfaced, 38
nm at 7 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 3 x 180 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 3 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 11
N o t e s : The No. 71 was designed as an ex-
perimental boat with high submerged
speed. It had a streamlined hull form and
was powered underwater by a powerful
electric motor drawing on a new type of
high-capacity battery. After extensive tri-
als it was scrapped in 1940, but the data
was used in designing later Japanese
high-speed boats.254 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: JAPA N

J A PAN: TYPES B 1 (1939), B 2 (1942), AND B 3 (1943), I - 3 0 ( 1 9 4 0 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

I-15 (7 March 1939), I-26 (10 April 1940),
I-30 (17 September 1940), I-37 (22 Oc-
tober 1941), I-40 (1942), I-41, I-42
( 1 9 4 3 )
B u i l d e r : Kure
I-17 (19 July 1939), I-23 (24 November
1939), I-29 (29 September 1940), I - 3 1
(13 March 1941), I-36 (1 November
1941), I-44 (1943), I-54, I-55, I-56
(1943), I-58 (1944)
B u i l d e r : Yokosuka
I-19 (16 September 1939), I-25 (8 June
1940), I-28 (18 December 1940), I-33 (1
May 1941), I-35 (24 September 1941)
B u i l d e r : Mitsubishi
I-21 (24 February 1940)
B u i l d e r : Kawasaki
I-27 (6 June 1940), I-32 (17 December
1940), I-34 (24 September 1941), I - 3 8
(15 April 1942), I-39 (15 April 1942), I-
43, I-45 (1943)
B u i l d e r : Sasebo
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2589 (Type B2: 2624,
Type B3: 2607) tons (surfaced), 3654
( Type B2: 3700, Type B3: 3688) tons
(submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 356970 x 30960 x 169100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 12,400 (Type B3: 4700)
bhp/2000 (Type B3: 1200) shp = 23.5/8
knots (Type B3: 17.75/6.5 knots)
R a n g e : 14,000 (Type B3: 21,000) nm at 16
knots surfaced, 96 (Type B3: 105) nm at
3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 17 torpedoes, 1 x 5.50 gun, 2 x
25mm AA guns, 1 aircraft
C o m p l e m e n t : 101A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: JAPA N 255

N o t e s : The Type B submarines were long-
range scouting boats equipped with a
seaplane hangar and catapult. The Ty p e
B3 boats had less powerful diesel engines
and were slower but had a greatly en-
hanced range. The I-36, the I-37, the I-
44, the I-56, and the I-58 were converted
to kaiten carriers in late 1944, losing
their deck guns, hangars, and catapults
and receiving cradles for four to six hu-
man torpedoes. An additional 8 Type B2,
18 Type B3, and 18 Type B4 (enlarged
Type B3) boats were canceled in 1943.
The I-23 failed to return from a patrol
to Hawai’i in February 1942; the U.S.
submarine Tautog torpedoed the I - 2 8
near Truk on 17 May; the I-30 was mined
near Singapore on 13 October; the de-
stroyer M c C a l l a sank the I - 1 5 off San
Cristobal on 2 November.
The destroyers E d w a r d s and Fa r r a g u t
sank the I-31 off Kiska on 12 May 1943;
the New Zealand trawler Tui sank the I-
1 7 near Noumea on 19 August; the de-
stroyer Pa t t e r s o n sank the I - 2 5 in the
New Hebrides on 3 September; U.S. air-
craft sank the I-19 near Makin on 18 Oc-
tober; the submarine Ta u r u s t o r p e d o e d
the I-34 off Penang on 13 November; the
destroyers Frazier and Meade sank the I-
3 5 off Tarawa on 23 November; the de-
stroyer Radford sank the I-40 near Makin
on 25 November; the destroyer Boyd sank
the I - 3 9 in the same area the next day;
aircraft from the escort carrier Chenango
sank the I-21 in the Gilbert Islands on 29
November.
The British destroyers Pa l a d i n a n d
Pe t a r d sank the I-27 near Addu Atoll on
12 February 1944; the submarine A s p r o
torpedoed the I - 4 3 east of Guam on 15
February; the U.S. submarine Tunny tor-
pedoed the I - 4 2 near Anguar on 23
March; the destroyer escort Manlove and
the submarine chaser PC-1135 sank the
I-32 off Wotje the following day; the I-33
was lost in an accident near Iyo Nada on
13 June; the submarine S a w f i s h t o r p e-
doed the I - 2 9 in Balintang Channel on
26 July; the I-26 failed to return from a
patrol off Leyte in October; the destroyer
escort Richard M. Rowell sank the I - 5 4
in Surigao Strait on 26 October; the de-
stroyer escort W h i t e h u r s t sank the I - 4 5
there on 29 October; the destroyer
Nicholas sank the I-38 south of Yap on 12
November; the destroyer escort Lawrence
C. Taylor sank the I-41 east of Samar on
18 November; the destroyer escorts Con-
k l i n and McCoy Reynolds sank the I - 3 7
off Leyte on 19 November.
The destroyers Collett, Heerman, Mc-
Cord, Mertz, and Uhlmann sank the I-56
off Okinawa on 18 April 1945, and air-
craft from the escort carrier Tu l a g i s a n k
the I-44 there on 29 April. The I-36 and
the I-58 were surrendered in August and
scuttled.256 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: JAPA N

TYPE A1 (1939)

I-9 (20 May 1939)
B u i l d e r : Kure
I-10 (20 September 1939), I-11 (28 Febru-
ary 1941)
B u i l d e r : Kawasaki
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2919 tons (surfaced),
4149 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 373900 x 31940 x 17970
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 12,400 bhp/2400 shp =
23.5/8 knots
R a n g e : 16,000 nm at 16 knots surfaced, 60
nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 16 torpedoes, 1 x 5.50 gun, 2 x
25mm AA guns, 1 aircraft
C o m p l e m e n t : 114
N o t e s : These boats were ﬁtted as ﬂagships
for submarine squadrons with extra staff
accommodations and more powerful
communications equipment. Two addi-
tional boats were canceled in 1942.
The destroyer Frazier sank the I-9 off
Kiska on 11 June 1943; the I-11 failed to
return from a patrol to the Ellis Islands in
January 1944; the destroyer David W.
Ta y l o r and the destroyer escort R i d d l e
sank the I-10 east of Saipan on 4 July.

TYPE KS (1941)

RO-100 (6 December 1941), RO-103
(6 December 1941), R O - 1 0 6 – R O - 1 0 7
(30 May 1942)
B u i l d e r : Kure
RO-101–RO-102 (17 May 1942), RO-104–
RO-105 (11 July 1942), RO-108 ( 2 6
October 1942), RO-109 (1942),
RO-110–RO-117 (1943)
B u i l d e r : Kawasaki
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 601 tons (surfaced), 782
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 1999100 x 19980 x 11960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 1100 bhp/760 shp =
14.25/8 knots
R a n g e : 3500 nm at 12 knots surfaced, 60
nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 10 torpedoes, 1 x 30 AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 38
N o t e s : These small submarines were
designed for short-range defensive
missions. Nine additional boats were pro-
jected but not built.
The P T- 1 5 0 and P T- 1 5 2 sank the
R O - 1 0 2 near Lae on 14 May 1943; the
destroyer Taylor sank the R O - 1 0 7 n e a r
Kolombangara Island on 12 July; the RO-
1 0 3 was mined in the Solomons on 28
July; the destroyer S a u ﬂey sank the R O -
101 off San Cristobal on 15 September;
the RO-100 was mined near Buin on 25
November.
The Australian minesweepers I p s w i c h
and Launceston and the Indian sloop
Jumna sank the RO-110 near Vizgapatam
on 11 February 1944; the destroyer es-
cort England sank the RO-104, the RO-
1 0 5, the R O - 1 0 6, the R O - 1 0 8, and the
R O - 1 1 6 off Kavieng between 22 and 31
May; the destroyer Ta y l o r sank the R O -
111 north of Kavieng on 11 June; the de-
stroyers M e l v i n and Wadleigh sank the
R O - 1 1 4 west of Tinian on 17 June; aA WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: JAPA N 257

U.S. Navy Liberator sank the RO-117 off
Saipan the same day.
The destroyers B e l l, Je n k i n s, and
O’Bannon and the destroyer escort Ulvert
M. Moore sank the RO-115 near Manila
on 31 January 1945; north of Luzon the
submarine Batﬁsh torpedoed the RO-112
on 11 February and the RO-113 the next
day; the destroyer escort Horace A. Bass
sank the R O - 1 0 9 near Okinawa on 25
April.

J A PAN: TYPE K D 7, I - 1 7 6 (E X – I - 1 76) (1941)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

I-76 (7 June 1941), I-81 (2 May 1942)
B u i l d e r : Kure
I - 7 7 (20 December 1941), I - 7 9 (16 July
1942), I-83 (21 January 1943)
B u i l d e r : Kawasaki
I - 8 0 (7 February 1942), I - 8 2 (30 May
1942), I - 8 5 (16 September 1943), I - 8 4
(12 December 1943)
B u i l d e r : Yokosuka
I-78 (24 February 1942)
B u i l d e r : Mitsubishi
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1833 tons (surfaced),
2602 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 346920 x 27910 x 15910
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 89,000 bhp/1800 shp =
23/8 knots258 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: JAPA N

R a n g e : 8000 nm at 16 knots surfaced, 50
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 12 torpedoes, 1 x 4.70 gun, 2 x
25mm AA guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 86
N o t e s : This class was developed from the
earlier KD6 type. They became the I-176
through the I - 1 8 5 in 1942. The I - 1 7 5,
the I - 1 7 7, and the I - 1 8 1 became trans-
port submarines in early 1943, landing
their deck gun and gaining a cradle for a
small landing craft.
The submarine chaser S C - 6 6 9 s a n k
the I - 1 7 8 off Espiritu Santo on 29 May
1943; the I-179 sank in an accident near
Iyo Nada on 14 July; the destroyer
Wa d s w o r t h sank the I - 1 8 2 near Espiritu
Santo on 1 September. Destroyers sank
the I-181 in the St. Georges Channel on
16 January 1944; the destroyer escort
Gilmore sank the I-180 off Kodiak Island
on 26 April; the submarine Pogy t o r p e-
doed the I-183 in the Bungo Strait on 28
April; the destroyers Fr a n k s, H a g g a r d,
and Johnston sank the I-176 in Buka Pas-
sage on 16 May; aircraft from the escort
carrier S u w a n n e e sank the I - 1 8 4 n e a r
Guam on 19 June; the destroyer N e w-
comb and the fast minesweeper Chandler
sank the I - 1 8 5 near Saipan on 22 June;
the destroyer escort Samuel S. Miles
sank the I-177 in the Palau Islands on 3
October.

TYPE K6 (1942)

RO-35 (4 June 1942), RO-37 (30 June
1942), RO-36 (14 October 1942), RO-38
(24 December 1942), RO-40 (6 March
1943), RO-41 (5 May 1943), RO-43 ( 5
June 1943), RO-45, RO-46, RO-48
(1943), RO-56 (1944)
B u i l d e r : Mitsubishi
RO-42 (25 October 1942), RO-39 (6 March
1943)
B u i l d e r : Sasebo
RO-44, RO-47, RO-49, RO-50 (1943), RO-
55, RO-56 (19,440
B u i l d e r : Mitsui
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1115 tons (surfaced),
1447 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 264910 x 23920 x 13940
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 4200 bhp/1200 shp =
19.75/8 knots
R a n g e : 5000 nm at 16 knots surfaced, 45
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 10 torpedoes, 1 x 30 AA gun, 2 x
25mm AA guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 54
N o t e s : These boats were an improved ver-
sion of the Type K5 with more powerful
m a c h i n e r y, increased fuel, and stronger
hull structure to increase diving depth.
Sixteen additional boats were canceled in
1942–1943.
The destroyer Pa t t e r s o n sank the R O -
2 5 in the Solomon Sea on 25 A u g u s t
1943, and the destroyer Cotten sank the
RO-38 near San Cristobal on 24 Novem-
b e r. The destroyer Buchanan sank the
RO-37 near San Cristobal on 22 January
1944; the destroyer Walker sank the RO-
3 9 near Wotje on 2 February; the de-
stroyer Phelps and the minesweeper Sage
sank the RO-40 off Kwajalein on 16 Feb-
ruary; the destroyers M a c d o n o u g h a n d
Stephen Po t t e r sank the R O - 4 5 off Tr u k
on 30 April; the destroyer escort Bangust
sank the R O - 4 2 off Kwajalein on 11
June; the destroyer Melvin sank the RO-
3 6 off Saipan on 13 June; the destroyer
escort Burden R. Hastings sank the
RO-44 off Eniwetok on 16 June; the de-
stroyer escort William C. Miller sank theA WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: JAPA N 259

R O - 4 8 off Saipan on 14 July; the de-
stroyer escort McCoy Reynolds sank the
RO-47 off Yap on 25 September. The de-
stroyer escort Thomason sank the RO-55
off Luzon on 7 February 1945; aircraft
from the escort carrier A n z i o sank the
RO-43 off Iwo Jima on 26 February; the
destroyer Haggard sank the R O - 4 1 o f f
Okinawa on 23 March; off Okinawa the
destroyer H u d s o n sank the R O - 4 9 on 5
April; the destroyers M e r t z and M o n s s e n
sank the R O - 5 6 on 9 April; the subma-
rine Sea Owl torpedoed the R O - 4 6 o f f
Wake Island on 18 April. The RO-50 was
surrendered in August and scuttled.

TYPE A2 (1943)

I-12 (1943)
B u i l d e r : Kawasaki
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2919 tons (surfaced),
4149 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 373900 x 31940 x 17980
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 4700 bhp/1200 shp =
17.75/6.25 knots
R a n g e : 22,000 nm at 16 knots surfaced, 75
nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 16 torpedoes, 1 x 5.50 gun, 2 x
25mm AA guns, 1 aircraft
C o m p l e m e n t : 114
N o t e s : This boat received less powerful en-
gines than the Type A1 class, sacriﬁcing
speed on the surface but greatly increas-
ing its range. It failed to return from a pa-
trol to the central Pacific in January
1945.

TYPE C3 (1943)

I-52, I-53, I-55 (1943)
B u i l d e r : Kure
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2564 tons (surfaced),
3644 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 356970 x 30960 x 169100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 4700 bhp/1200 shp =
17.75/6.5 knots
R a n g e : 21,0000 nm at 16 knots surfaced,
105 nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 20 torpedoes, 2 x 5.50 guns, 2 x
25mm AA guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 101
N o t e s : These boats received less powerful
engines than the Type C2 class, sacriﬁc i n g
speed on the surface but greatly incre a s-
ing their range. They also were ﬁtted with
snorkels. An additional 22 boats were
canceled. The I-53 became a kaiten car-
rier in early 1945, landing its deck gun
and carrying cradles for up to six human
torpedoes.
Aircraft from the escort carrier Bogue
sank the I-52 off the Azores on 24 June
1944, and the destroyer escorts Reynolds
and Wyman sank the I-55 near Tinian on
28 July. The I-53 was surrendered in Au-
gust 1945 and scuttled.260 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: J A PA N

TYPES D1 (1943) AND D2 (1944)

I-361, I-363 (1943)
B u i l d e r : Kure
I-362, I-364 (1943), I-366, I-367, I-370,
I-371 (1944)
B u i l d e r : Mitsubishi
I-365, I-368, I-369, I-372, I-373, I - 3 7 4
(1944)
B u i l d e r : Yokosuka
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1779 (Type D2: 1926)
tons (surfaced), 2215 (Type D2: 2240)
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 2 4 1920 ( Type D2: 242990) x
29920 x 15970 (Type D2: 16970)
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 1850 (Type D2: 1750)
bhp/1200 shp = 13/6.5 knots
R a n g e : 15,000 nm at 10 knots surfaced,
120 (Type D2: 100) nm at 3 knots sub-
merged
A r m a m e n t : 1 x 5.50 gun, 2 x 25mm A A
guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 60
N o t e s : These types were developed as
transport submarines to carry troops,
equipment, and supplies to forward gar-
risons. They carried small landing craft
and inﬂatable boats to transport supplies
to the shore. An additional 92 units of
Type D1 and 144 of Type D2 were
planned but canceled before construc-
tion began, and construction ceased on
the I-374 in March 1945.
The submarine Sea Devil t o r p e d o e d
the I-364 east of Yokosuka on 16 Septem-
ber 1944, and the submarine S c a b b a r d-
ﬁs h torpedoed the I - 3 6 5 closer in on 28
November. The destroyer escort Fleming
sank the I-362 north of Truk on 18 Janu-
ary 1945; the submarine L a g a r t o t o r p e-
doed the I - 3 7 1 in Bungo Strait on 24
February; off Iwo Jima the destroyer es-
cort Finnegan sank the I-370 on 26 Feb-
ruary; aircraft from the escort carrier
Anzio sank the I-368 on 27 February and
also the I - 3 6 1 off Okinawa on 30 May.
Carrier aircraft sank the I - 3 7 2 at Yo k o-
suka on 18 July, and the submarine
Snakeﬁsh torpedoed the I-373 off Shang-
hai on 14 August. The three surviving
boats were surrendered in August 1945.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: JAPA N 261

J A PAN: TYPE A M, I - 1 4 ( 1 9 4 4 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

I-15 (12 April 1944), I-1 (10 June 1944), I-
13, I-14 (1944)
B u i l d e r : Kawasaki
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 3603 tons (surfaced),
4762 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 373900 x 38950 x 19940
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 4400 bhp/600 shp =
16.75/5.5 knots
R a n g e : 21,000 nm at 16 knots surfaced, 60
nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 12 torpedoes, 1 x 5.50 gun, 2 x triple
25mm AA guns, 1 x single 25mm AA gun,
2 aircraft
C o m p l e m e n t : 114
N o t e s : This class was a substantial expan-
sion of the earlier Type A headquarters
submarine design with two aircraft and a
heavier antiaircraft battery. Only the I-13
and I-14 were completed; construction of
the other boats was halted in March
1945. Three additional submarines were
canceled in 1943.
Aircraft from the escort carrier A n z i o
sank the I-13 near Truk on 16 July 1945,
and the I - 1 4 was surrendered in A u g u s t
and scrapped.262 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: JAPA N

TYPE SH (1944)

I-351 (1944), I-352 (23 April 1944)
B u i l d e r : Kure
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 3512 tons (surfaced),
4290 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 364920 x 33940 x 20920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 3700 bhp/1200 shp =
15.75/6.25 knots
R a n g e : 13,000 nm at 14 knots surfaced,
100 nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 4 torpedoes, 2 x 30 trench mortars, 2
x triple 25mm AA guns, 1 x 25mm A A
gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 90
N o t e s : This class was designed to support
ﬂying boats and carried large supplies of
aviation gasoline, bombs, and aircraft tor-
pedoes. Four additional boats were can-
celed in 1942–1943.
USAAF B-29 bombers sank the in-
complete I-352 at Kure on 22 June 1945,
and the submarine Blueﬁn torpedoed the
I-351 in the South China Sea on 14 July
1945.

J A PAN: TYPE S T O ( 1 9 4 4 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

I-400 (1944), I-404 (7 July 1944)
B u i l d e r : Kure
I-401, I-402 (1944)
B u i l d e r : Sasebo
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 5223 tons (surfaced),
6560 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 400930 x 39940 x 23900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 7700 bhp/2400 shp =
18.75/6.5 knots
R a n g e : 30,000 nm at 16 knots surfaced, 60
nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 20 torpedoes, 1 x 5.50 gun, 3 x triple
25mm AA guns, 1 x single 25mm AA gun,
3 aircraft
C o m p l e m e n t : 144
N o t e s : This class was designed to launch
aircraft for operations against cities of
the U.S. mainland. These boats were the
largest submarines built until after World
War II. They had double pressure hulls
over three-quarters of their length,
placed one above the other forward and
side by side over their midships section.
They were commissioned with search
radar and snorkel equipment. One addi-
tional unit was canceled in 1942 and 14
further boats in 1945. U.S. carrier air-
craft sank the incomplete I - 4 0 4 at Kure
on 28 July 1945. The three other boats
were surrendered in August and used for
trials by the U.S. Navy before they were
scuttled in 1946.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: JAPA N 263

TYPE ST (1944)

I-201, I-202, I-203 ( 1 9 4 4 ) , I - 2 0 4 (16 De-
cember 1944), I-205 (15 February 1945),
I-206 (26 March 1945)
B u i l d e r : Kure
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1291 tons (surfaced),
1450 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 259920 x 19900 x 179110
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 2750 bhp/5000 shp =
15.75/19 knots
R a n g e : 5800 nm at 14 knots surfaced, 135
nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 10 torpedoes, 2 x 25mm AA guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 31
N o t e s : The design for this class was devel-
oped using data from the experimental
No. 71 to create a torpedo attack type
with high underwater speed. It featured a
streamlined hull, retractable deck ﬁttings
and weapons (including a snorkel),
spring-loaded cover plates for limber
holes, powerful electric motors, and a
new high-capacity battery that enabled it
to maintain full speed for up to 55 min-
utes followed by a cruise at 3 knots for up
to 12 hours. The design was optimized
for mass production with extensive use of
prefabrication and an all-welded hull.
The incomplete I-204 and I-205 were
wrecked by USAAF B-29 bombers, and
the incomplete I - 2 0 6 was wrecked in a
storm. The I-201 through the I-203 were
surrendered in August 1945 and scuttled
after testing by the U.S. Navy. An addi-
tional 17 boats were either not completed
or canceled.

TYPE SS (1944)

Ha–101, Ha–104, Ha–106 ( 1 9 4 4 ) ,
Ha–107, Ha–108, Ha–110 (1945)
B u i l d e r : Tanagawa
Ha–102, Ha–103 (1944), H a – 1 0 5 ,
Ha–109, Ha–111, Ha–112 (1945)
B u i l d e r : Mitsubishi
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 429 tons (surfaced), 493
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 146900 x 20900 x 13930
M a c h i n e r y : 1 diesel engine, 1 electric mo-
t o r, 1 shaft. 400 bhp/150 shp = 10/5
knots
R a n g e : 3000 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 146
nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 1 x 25mm AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 21
N o t e s : Heavy losses of the Type D1 trans-
port submarines led to the development
of this smaller type. It was optimized for
mass production, making extensive use of
prefabrication, and featured all-welded
construction. Twenty-eight additional
units were canceled in favor of high-
speed attack boats, and the Ha–110 and
the H a – 1 1 2 were not completed. A l l
boats were surrendered in August 1945
and scrapped or scuttled.264 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: THE NETHERLANDS

TYPE S T S ( 1 9 4 5 )

Ha–201, Ha–202, Ha–203, Ha–204,
Ha–205, Ha–207, Ha–208, Ha–209,
Ha–210, Ha–216 (1945), Ha–215 ( 1 5
June 1945), Ha–217 (26 June 1945),
Ha–218 (2 July 1945), Ha–219 (12 July
1945), Ha–228 (18 July 1945), H a – 2 2 9
(27 July 1945), Ha–230 (1946)
B u i l d e r : Sasebo
Ha–212 (25 June 1945), Ha–221 (4 August
1945)
B u i l d e r : Kawasaki
Ha–206 (10 July 1945), Ha–211 (24 A p r i l
1946)
B u i l d e r : Tanagawa
Ha–213 (29 July 1945), Ha–214 (15 August
1945)
B u i l d e r : Mitsubishi
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 377 tons (surfaced), 440
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 1739110 x 13910 x 11930
M a c h i n e r y : 1 diesel engine, 2 electric mo-
tors, 1 shaft. 400 bhp/1250 shp =
10.5/13 knots
R a n g e : 3000 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 100
nm at 2 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow), to-
tal 4 torpedoes, 1 x 7.7mm machine gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 22
N o t e s : The design for these high-speed
coastal submarines employed the data
collected from the trials of the No. 71.
Mass production using prefabrication
and all-welded construction was a feature
of this type. They had streamlined hulls,
high-power electric motors, and high-
capacity batteries. Their test depth was
500 feet, and many units received
snorkels. A total of 90 boats were or-
dered, but only 10 were completed; none
undertook any operational patrols.

THE NETHERLANDS
K . X I CLASS (1924)

K.XI (24 April 1924), K.XII (15 July 1924),
K.XIII (23 December 1924)
B u i l d e r : Fijenoord
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 670 tons (surfaced), 815
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 2189100 x 20920 x 12920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 2400 bhp/725 shp =
15/8 knots
R a n g e : 3500 nm at 11 knots surfaced, 13
nm at 8 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 530mm plus 4 x 450mm
torpedo tubes (4 bow. 2 x 450mm stern),
total 12 torpedoes, 1 x 88mm AA gun, 1 x
12.7mm machine gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 31
N o t e s : This was the ﬁrst indigenous Dutch
submarine design, by J. J. van der Struyff.
It was a double-hull type, with three
main ballast tanks amidships, for colonial
service in the Dutch East Indies.
Japanese aircraft sank the K.XII at So-
erabaya on 18 February 1942. The other
boats escaped to Australia. They were op-
erational until 1944, when they trans-
ferred to the training role, and were
stricken in 1946.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: THE NETHERLANDS 265

O . 9 CLASS (1925)

O.9 (7 April 1925)
B u i l d e r : De Schelde
O.10 (30 July 1925)
B u i l d e r : Nederlandsche
O.11 (19 March 1925)
B u i l d e r : Fijenoord
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 568 tons (surfaced), 715
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 198960 x 18940 x 119100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 1800 bhp/620 shp =
15/8 knots
R a n g e : 3500 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 26
nm at 8 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 530mm plus 3 x 450mm
torpedo tubes (4 bow. 1 x 450mm stern),
total 10 torpedoes, 2 x 40mm AA guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 31
N o t e s : J. J. van der Struyff designed these
boats as home service equivalents of his
first colonial submarines. The O . 9 a n d
the O.10 escaped to the United Kingdom
in 1940 and served operationally until
they decommissioned in 1944. The O.11
was seized by the Germans and scuttled
in September 1944. It was raised and
scrapped postwar, along with its sisters.

K . X I V CLASS (1932)

K . X I V (11 July 1932), K . X V ( D e c e m b e r
1932), K.XVI (April 1933)
B u i l d e r : Rotterdamse
K.XVII (July 1932), K.XVIII (July 1932)
B u i l d e r : Fijenoord
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 771 tons (surfaced), 1008
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 242990 x 25900 x 129100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 3200 bhp/1000 shp
= 17/9 knots
R a n g e : 3500 nm at 11 knots surfaced, 26
nm at 8.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern, 1 x twin external trainable
mount), total 14 torpedoes, 1 x 88mm AA
gun, 2 x 40mm AA guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 38
N o t e s : Van der Struyff’s improved and en-
larged version of his previous colonial
boat design carried a uniform armament
of 533mm torpedo tubes and added an
external trainable twin mount forward of
the conning tower. When the K.XIV and
the K.XV were reﬁtted at Philadelphia in
late 1942 and early 1943, the external
mounts were deleted.
The K . X V I I was mined in the Gulf of
Siam on 21 December 1941; the Japa-
nese submarine I - 6 6 torpedoed the K . X V I
off the coast of Borneo on 25 December;
the K . X V I I I was scuttled at Soerabaja on
24 January 1942. Japanese forces raised
the boat, partially repaired it, and sta-
tioned it as a radar picket in Madoera
Strait, where it was torpedoed by the sub-
marine Taciturn on 16 June 1945. The
other two boats escaped to Ceylon and re-
mained operational until April 1946. They
were stricken on 1 June 1946.266 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: THE NETHERLANDS

O . 1 6 (27 JANUARY 1936)

B u i l d e r : De Schelde
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 896 tons (surfaced), 1170
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 254930 x 21990 x 13930
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 3200 bhp/1000 shp
= 18/9 knots
R a n g e : 3500 nm at 11 knots surfaced, 26
nm at 8.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern, 1 x twin external trainable
mount), total 14 torpedoes, 1 x 88mm AA
gun, 2 x 40mm AA guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 38
N o t e s : Gerhard de Rooy designed this
double-hull submarine for home service.
It was constructed from high-tensile steel
and 49 percent welded, which increased
its diving depth. It also was ﬁtted with a
snorkel, to allow the diesel engines to run
underwater in good weather conditions.
In June 1939 the O-16 transferred to the
East Indies. It was mined in the Gulf of
Siam on 15 December 1941

[ P O L A N D ] —O R Z E L CLASS (1938)

Orzel (15 January 1938)
B u i l d e r : De Schelde
Sept (17 October 1938)
B u i l d e r : Rotterdamse
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1100 tons (surfaced),
1650 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 275970 x 22900 x 13940
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Sulzer diesel engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 4740 bhp/1100
shp = 20/9 knots
R a n g e : 7000 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 100
nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 12 x 550mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 4 stern, 1 x quadruple external
trainable mount), total 20 torpedoes, 1 x
105mm gun, 1 x twin 40mm AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 60
N o t e s : These submarines were designed by
the Nederlandsche Verenigde Scheeps-
bouw Bureaux in ‘s-Gravenhage, in coop-
eration with a team from the Polish Navy.
They incorporated many features of the
earlier Dutch O . 1 6, including the exter-
nal trainable mount. The hulls were
entirely welded, and all controls were hy-
draulically operated.
The O r z e l escaped the German inva-
sion of Poland to the United Kingdom
and was mined in the North Sea on 8
June 1940. The Sept escaped and was in-
terned in Sweden until the war’s end,
when it returned to Polish service until it
decommissioned on 15 September 1969.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: THE NETHERLANDS 267

O . 1 9 CLASS (1938)

O.19 (22 September 1938), O.20 (31 Janu-
ary 1939)
B u i l d e r : Wilton-Fijenoord
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 998 tons (surfaced), 1536
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 265990 x 24970 x 13910
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Sulzer diesel engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 5200 bhp/1000
shp = 19.25/9 knots
R a n g e : 3500 nm at 11 knots surfaced, 26
nm at 8.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(4 bow, 2 stern, 1 x twin external train-
able mount), total 14 torpedoes, 40
mines, 1 x 88mm AA gun, 2 x 40mm AA
guns, 1 x 12.7mm machine gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 55
N o t e s : These submarines were very similar
to the Orzel class, with a reduced torpedo
battery and 10 vertical mine tubes ﬁtted
on each beam. They were equipped with
a more sophisticated snorkel system than
their precursor.
Both boats served in the East Indies.
The destroyer U r a n a m i forced the O . 2 0
to the surface off the coast of Malaya on
19 December 1941, and it was scuttled.
The O . 1 9 wrecked on Ladd Reef in the
South China Sea on 8 July 1945 and was
scuttled.

O . 2 1 CLASS (1939)

O.21 (21 October 1939), O.22 (20 January
1940)
B u i l d e r : De Schelde
O.23 (5 December 1939), O.24 (18 March
1940), O.26 (23 November 1940), O.27
(26 September 1941)
B u i l d e r : Rotterdamse
O.25 (1 May 1940)
B u i l d e r : Wilton-Fijenoord
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 934 tons (surfaced), 1350
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 2559110 x 21940 x 12960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Sulzer diesel engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 5200 bhp/1000
shp = 19.5/9 knots
R a n g e : 7100 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 26
nm at 8.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern, 1 x twin external trainable
mount), total 14 torpedoes, 1 x 88mm AA
gun, 2 x 40mm AA guns, 1 x 12.7mm ma-
chine gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 55
N o t e s : This design was essentially the
same as the O.19 class, with minelaying
capability deleted. Their ballast tank
valve arrangements were improved to en-
able them to dive more quickly.
The O . 2 1 through the O . 2 4 escaped to
Britain when German forces invaded The
Netherlands in May 1940, and they saw
extensive service in the Atlantic, Mediter-
ranean, and East Indies. The O . 2 2 m o s t
probably was mined in early November
1940. The O . 2 3 decommissioned on 1 De-
c e m b e r, 1948, the O . 2 4 on 22 Fe b r u a r y
1954, and the O . 2 1 on 2 November 1957.
The O . 2 5 through the O . 2 7 w e r e
seized and became the German U D - 3
through U D - 5. They became training
boats in 1943. The UD-3 and the UD-4
were scuttled on 3 May 1945, while the
U D - 5 was surrendered. It recommis-
sioned as the Dutch O . 2 7, served as a
training and trials boat, and was stricken
on 14 November 1959.268 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: SOVIET UNION

SOVIET UNION
SERIES I (1928)

Dekabrist (3 November 1928), N a r a d o v o y l e t s
(19 May 1929), Krasnogvardeyets (12 July
1 9 2 9 )
B u i l d e r : Baltic
Revolyutsioner (16 April 1929), Spartakovets
(28 September 1929), Yakobinets ( 1 2
May 1930)
B u i l d e r : Nikolayev
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 933 tons (surfaced), 1354
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 249940 x 21940 x 12960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Kolomna diesel engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 2600 bhp/1600
shp = 14/9 knots
R a n g e : 7500 nm at 9 knots surfaced, 132
nm at 2 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 533mm torpedo tubes (6
b o w, 2 stern), total 14 torpedoes, 1 x
100mm gun, 1 x 45mm AA gun, 1 x
7.62mm machine gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 53
N o t e s : Boris Mikhailovich Malinin de-
signed this double-hull class, the first
submarines built by the Soviet Union.
They were good sea boats but suffered
from stability problems, dived very slowly,
and also displayed poor quality control in
their construction. Numerous reﬁts were
necessary to correct these deficiencies,
after which their time to dive was re-
duced from 3 minutes to 30 seconds.
The ﬁrst three boats went to the Baltic
Fleet and the second group to the Black
Sea. The Baltic Fleet units transferred to
the Northern Fleet in 1933. The D e k a b r i s t
sank during exercises in Molotovskiy Bay
in November 1940; the Ya k o b i n e t s w a s
bombed while dry-docked at Sevastopol
on 12 November 1941; the K r a s n o g-
v a r d e t s failed to return from a patrol off
the Norwegian coast in June 1942; the
antisubmarine vessels U J - 1 0 2 and U J -
103 sank the Revolutsioner off Yevpatoria
on 4 December 1943. The two surviving
boats were stricken in the late 1950s, the
Naradovoylets becoming a museum ship
at Kronshtadt in the 1980s.

SERIES III (1930)

Shch–1 Shchuka (1 December 1930),
Shch–2 Okun’ (6 November 1931),
Shch–4 Komsomolets (2 May 1931),
Shch–3 Yorsh (6 November 1931)
B u i l d e r : Baltic
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 578 tons (surfaced), 704
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 187900 x 20940 x 12950
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 1370 bhp/800 shp =
12.5/8.5 knots
R a n g e : 3250 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 110
nm at 2 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern), total 10 torpedoes, 1 x
45mm AA gun, 2 x 7.62mm machine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 35
N o t e s : This class, with a partial double hull
and saddle ballast tanks, served as proto-
types for several large series of successful
coastal submarines of similar design.
They were redesignated the S h c h – 3 1A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: SOVIET UNION 269

through the S h c h – 3 4 and then the
S h c h – 3 0 1 through the Shch–304 i n
1934. All four boats operated in the
Baltic. The S h c h – 3 0 1 was mined off
Cape Juminda on 27 August 1941; the
Shch–302 near Somen Island on 13 Oc-
tober 1942; the Shch–304 in the Gulf of
Finland in December 1942. The
Shch–303 became the S-303 in October
1949 and was scrapped in 1959 (the con-
ning tower was preserved as a memorial
at Kronshtadt).

SERIES II (1931) AND SERIES XI (1935)

Leninets (28 February 1931), Marksist ( 2 1
May 1931), Bolshevik (8 July 1931)
B u i l d e r : Baltic
Garibaldiets (31 August 1931), Chartist ( 5
June 1932), K a r b o n a r i (3 November
1932)
B u i l d e r : Nikolayev
Voroshilovets (15 May 1935), Kirovets ( 2 5
August 1935), Dzerzhinets (10 Septem-
ber 1935), L-12 (7 November 1936), L -
11 (4 December 1936), L-10 (18 Decem-
ber 1936)
B u i l d e r : Dalzavod
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1051 (Series XI: 1100)
tons (surfaced), 1327 (Series XI: 1400)
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 265990 x 21980 x 13990 (Series
XI: 14950)
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 2200 bhp/1050 (Series
XI: 1450) shp = 14/9 knots
R a n g e : 6000 nm at 9 knots surfaced, 135
nm at 2 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 12 torpedoes, 20 mines, 1 x
100mm gun, 1 x 45mm AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 54
N o t e s : These double-hull minelayers with
saddle main ballast tanks were designed
by Malinin on the basis of his earlier Se-
ries I class, with many features incorpo-
rated from the former British L - 5 5.
Mines were carried in two horizontal
tubes and ejected at the stern, either on
the surface or while submerged. The ﬁrst
three boats went to the Baltic, the next
three to the Black Sea, and the ﬁnal six to
the Paciﬁc ﬂeets. The named boats were
redesignated the L-1 through the L-10 in
1934.
The L-2 was mined off Keri Island on
14 November 1941; German artillery
sank the L - 1 in the Neva River in the
same month; the L - 9 failed to return
from a Pa c i ﬁc patrol in 1941–1942; the
antisubmarine vessel UJ-104 sank the L-
6 near Constanza on 18 April 1944. In
1949 the L-3 through the L-6 were redes-
ignated the B-3 through the B-6; the L-7
and the L - 8 were redesignated the B - 2 4
and the B-25; the L-12 was redesignated
the B-12. All were stricken between 1956
and 1963.270 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: SOVIET UNION

SERIES V (1932)

Shch–101 Losos (25 December 1932),
Shch–102 Leshch (19 April 1933),
Shch–103 Karp (1933), Shch–104 (May
1933), Shch–106 (May 1933), Shch–107
(July 1933), Shch–108 (July 1933),
Shch–111 Karas (July 1933), S h c h – 1 0 5
(August 1933), Shch–109 ( A u g u s t
1933), Shch–110 (October 1933),
Shch–113 Sterlyad (12 December 1933),
Shch–112 (April 1934), S h c h – 1 1 4
(1934), Shch–121 Zubatka (3 April 1934),
Shch–115 (4 April 1934), Shch–116
Osetr (1934), Shch–117 Makrel (15 April
1934), Shch–118 Kefal’ ( 1 9 3 4 ) ,
Shch–119 Beluga (7 May 1934),
Shch–120 (June 1934), Shch–123 Ugor
(26 August 1934), Shch–125 (26 August
1934), Shch–122 Saida (29 A u g u s t
1934), Shch–124 (29 December 1934)
B u i l d e r : Dalzavod
Shch–305 Lin (31 December 1933),
Shch–306 Piksha (1 August 1934),
Shch–307 Treska (1 August 1934)
B u i l d e r : Admiralty
Shch–201 Sazan (3 April 1934), Shch–202
Seld (25 May 1934), Shch–203 Kambala
(29 May 1934), Shch–205 Nerpa (6 No-
vember 1934), Shsch–206 (6 November
1934), Shch–204 Minoga (31 December
1934)
B u i l d e r : Nikolayev
Shch–308 Siyomga (December 1933),
Shch–309 Delfin (10 April 1935),
Shch–310 Bielukha (10 April 1935),
Shch–311 Kumzha (10 April 1935)
B u i l d e r : Baltic
Shch–207 (25 March 1935)
B u i l d e r : 61 Kommuna
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 589 tons (surfaced), 708
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 1919110 x 20940 x 14910
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 1600 bhp/800 shp =
14/8 knots
R a n g e : 5750 nm at 8.5 knots surfaced, 125
nm at 2 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern), total 10 torpedoes, 2 x
45mm AA guns, 1 x 7.62mm machine
gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 40
N o t e s : This series was the production ver-
sion of the earlier S h c h u k a type. The
Shch–101 through the Shch–124 went to
the Pacific, the S h c h – 2 0 1 through the
Shch–207 went to the Black Sea, and the
Shch–305 through the Shch–311 went to
the Baltic ﬂeets.
The Shch–204 was mined off the Bul-
garian coast on 3 July 1941, and the
Shch–206 was mined off Sulina in Sep-
tember 1941. The Shch–307 was mined
near Suursaari on 17 August 1942; the
minesweeper M - 3 7 sank the S h c h – 3 0 8
in the Gulf of Finland on 31 August; the
Finnish submarine chasers V M V- 1 3 a n d
VMV-15 sank the Shch–311 off Porkkala
on 15 October; the Finnish submarine
Ve t e h i n e n sank the S h c h – 3 0 5 in the
Åland Sea on 5 November; the Shch–307
was mined there later the same month.
The S h c h – 3 0 4 was mined off Cape
Tarkhanskutskiy in September 1943.
The surviving boats9 designations were
changed from S h c h - to S - in 1949, and
they were stricken in the mid-1950s.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: SOVIET UNION 271

SERIES VI (1933) AND VIb i s ( 1 9 3 4 )

M-1 (8 April 1933), M-2 (8 April 1933), M-
6 (24 April 1933), M-3 (8 June 1933), M-
7 (5 August 1933), M-8 (11 A u g u s t
1933), M-10 (24 August 1933), M-51 (8
September 1933), M-9 (27 September
1933), M-13 (3 October 1933), M-5 (29
October 1933), M-4 (18 November
1933), M-11 (29 November 1933), M-12
(2 December 1933), M-18 (24 December
1933), M-14 (26 December 1933), M-15
(26 December 1933), M-17 (27 Decem-
ber 1933), M-16 (28 December 1933),
M-52 (18 January 1934), M-20 ( 1 7
March 1934), M-26 (14 April 1934), M-
25 (16 April 1934), M-21 (11 May
1934), M-19 (14 May 1934), M-22 ( 1 5
May 1934), M-23 (16 May 1934), M-24
(1 June 1934), M-28 (21 June 1934), M-
27 (23 July 1934)
B u i l d e r : Sverdlovsk
M-53 (10 February 1934), M-54 (15 Sep-
tember 1935), M-55 (20 November
1935), M-56 (20 November 1935)
B u i l d e r : Nikolayev
M-72 (23 December 1934), M-71 (31 De-
cember 1 34), M-74 (31 December
1934), M-73 (5 January 1935), M-75 (5
February 1935), M-76 (8 Fe b r u a r y
1935), M-78 (21 March 1935), M-77 (2
September 1935), M-79–M-80 (15 Sep-
tember 1935)
B u i l d e r : Zhdanov
M-83 (1 June 1935), M-82 (10 June 1935),
M-84–M-86 (15 July 1935), M-81 ( 1 5
September 1935)
B u i l d e r : Sudomekh
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 160 tons (surfaced), 200
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 124900 x 10930 x 8960
M a c h i n e r y : 1 diesel engine, 1 electric mo-
t o r, 1 shaft. 685 bhp/235 shp = 13/6
knots
R a n g e : 900 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 60 nm
at 2 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 2 torpedoes, 1 x 45mm A A
gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 16
N o t e s : The design of these small single-
hull boats allowed them to be transported
between the various ﬂeet operating areas
on special rail cars. They were not very
effective, however, especially as they
could not carry reload torpedoes and had
a very limited range. The M - 1 t h r o u g h
the M - 2 8, the M - 5 3, the M - 5 6, the M -
8 2, and the M - 8 4 through the M - 8 6
served in the Paciﬁc Fleet; the M-51, the
M - 5 2, and the M - 5 5 operated in the
Caspian Sea; and the other boats served
in the Baltic Fleet. The M-72, the M-73,
the M-75, and the M-76 were decommis-
sioned in early 1941.
The U - 1 4 4 torpedoed the M - 7 8 o f f
Ventspils on 24 June 1941; the M-71, the
M - 8 0, and the M - 8 3 were blown up at
Liepaya the same day to prevent their
capture; the M-81 was mined near Laine
Bank on 1 July; German aircraft sank the
M - 7 4 at Kronshtadt on 23 September.
The surviving boats were scrapped imme-
diately after World War II.272 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: SOVIET UNION

SERIES IV (1934)

Pravda (3 January 1934), Zvezda (15 Febru-
ary 1934), Iskra (4 December 1934)
B u i l d e r : Baltic
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1200 tons (surfaced),
1870 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 295930 x 26930 x 10920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 5400 bhp/1000 shp
= 18.5/7.75 knots
R a n g e : 5700 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 105
nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern), total 10 torpedoes, 2 x
100mm guns, 1 x 45mm AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 54
N o t e s : These double-hull submarines, de-
signed by A. N. Asafov, were intended to
operate with the fleet. They were poor
sea boats, dived slowly, and required mul-
tiple refits to suit them for service. A
fourth example was canceled.
The Pravda probably was mined in the
Baltic in September 1941. The two sur-
viving boats were redesignated the B - 3 1
and the B - 1, respectively, in 1949 and
were stricken in the mid-1950s.

SERIES X (1935)

Shch-322 (10 April 1935), S h c h - 3 2 3 –
Shch-324 (10 April 1935), Shch-321 (21
April 1935), Shch-327 (27 April 1935),
Shch-313–Shch-314 (28 June 1935),
Shch-312 (1936), Shch-329 (1939)
B u i l d e r : Baltic
Shch-326 (12 April 1935), Shch-328 ( 2 7
April 1935), Shch-325 (12 May 1935),
Shch-318 (11 August 1935), S h c h - 3 1 7
(24 September 1935), Shch-320 (12 Fe b-
ruary 1936), Shch-319 (15 Fe b r u a r y
1936), Shch-406 (17 December 1939),
Shch-405 (1940), Shch-407 (1941), S h c h -
408 (1941), Shch-409 (1941), S h c h - 4 1 0
(1941), Shch-411 (July 1941), S h c h -
412 (July 1941), Shch-413 (1946), S h c h -
414 (1946), Shch-415 (1946), S h c h - 4 1 7
(1947), Shch-419 ( 1 9 4 7 )
B u i l d e r : Admiralty
Shch-126 (20 April 1935), Shch-130 ( 8
June 1935), Shch-128 (9 June 1935),
Shch-127 (13 June 1935), Shch-131 ( 4
July 1935), Shch-132 (4 July 1935),
Shch-137 (22 July 1935), Shch-138 ( 2 2
July 1935), Shch-133 (8 August 1935),
Shch-129 (10 October 1935)
B u i l d e r : Dalzavod
Shch-208 (7 October 1935), Shch-209 ( 2
March 1936), Shch-215 (11 January
1937), Shch-213 (13 April 1937), Shch-
214 (23 April 1937), Shch-216 (1940)
B u i l d e r : 61 Kommuna
Shch-315 (27 December 1935), S h c h - 3 1 6
(27 December 1935)
B u i l d e r : Zhdanov
Shch-210 (13 March 1936), Shch-211 ( 3
September 1936), Shch-210 (28 Decem-
ber 1936)
B u i l d e r : Nikolayev
Shch-428 (1940), Shch-426 (1941), S h c h -
420 (1946), Shch-425 (1946), Shch-429
(1946), Shch-427 (1947), S h c h - 4 3 0
(1947), Shch-431 (1947)
B u i l d e r : Sudomekh
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 607 tons (surfaced), 749
tons (submerged)A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: SOVIET UNION 273

D i m e n s i o n s : 192990 x 20940 x 14910
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 1600 bhp/800 shp =
13.5/8 knots
R a n g e : 3650 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 125
nm at 2 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern), total 10 torpedoes, 2 x
45mm AA guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 40
N o t e s : These were improved versions of
the Series VI type. The S h c h - 1 2 6
through the Shch-140 went to the Paciﬁc
Fleet, the S h c h - 3 1 2 through the S h c h -
316 and the Shch-325 through the Shch-
329 to the Northern Fleet, the Shch-208
through the S h c h - 2 1 6 to the Black Sea
Fleet, and the remainder to the Baltic
Fleet. Two additional boats were aban-
doned on the slips at Leningrad during
World War II and scrapped incomplete.
A Soviet fishing vessel accidentally
rammed and sank the S h c h - 3 2 8 in Kola
Inlet in October 1939. The Shch 211
probably was mined off the Bulgarian
coast on 16 November 1941, and the
S h c h - 3 2 4 probably was mined in the
Gulf of Finland the same month. Ger-
man aircraft sank the S h c h - 2 1 0 s o u t h
of the Crimea on 13 March, 1942; the
S h c h - 3 2 5 was scuttled after hitting a
mine near Porsanger Fjord on 8 A p r i l ;
an internal explosion wrecked the
S h c h - 2 1 2 at Sevastopol in May; the
Italian motor torpedo boat M A S - 5 7 1
sank the S h c h - 2 1 4 off Cape Aitodor on
19 June; the S h c h - 2 1 3 was blown up
after stranding at Sochi on 12 July; the
Finnish minelayer R u o t s i n s a l m i s a n k
the S h c h - 3 1 7 in the Baltic on 14 July;
the S h c h - 2 0 8, the S h c h - 3 1 3, and the
S h c h - 4 0 5 were mined in August and
the S h c h - 3 1 9 in September; the
Finnish submarine I k u - Tu r s o t o r p e d o e d
the S h c h - 3 2 0 in the Åland Sea on 27
October; the S h c h - 3 2 2 was mined in
N o v e m b e r. The S h c h - 3 2 3 was probably
mined off Peterhof on 1 May 1943; the
Finnish minelayer R u o t s i n s a l m i s a n k
the S h c h - 4 0 8 near Vaindlo Island on 25
May; the Finnish minelayer R u l a h t i
sank the S h c h - 4 0 6 off Steinskar Island
the next day; the S h c h - 3 2 6 failed to re-
turn from a patrol off the Norwegian
coast in July; the S h c h - 3 1 5 failed to re-
turn from a similar mission in October.
A German submarine chaser sank the
S h c h - 2 1 6 west of Cape Ta r k h a n k u t s k i y
on 17 February 1944, and Soviet air-
craft sank the S h c h - 3 1 4 in the Barents
Sea in error on 21 September.
The surviving boats’ designations were
changed from S h c h - to S - in 1949, and
they were stricken in the mid-1950s.274 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: SOVIET UNION

SERIES XIII (1936)

L-13 (2 August 1936), L-14 (10 December
1 9 3 6 ) , L-15 (26 December 1936), L - 1 6
(9 July 1937), L-17 (5 November 1937),
L-18 (12 May 1938), L-19 (26 May
1938)
B u i l d e r : Dalzavod
L-22 (23 September 1939), L-20 (14 A p r i l
1940), L-21 (17 July 1940)
B u i l d e r : Baltic
L-23 (29 April 1940), L-24 (17 December
1940), L25 (1941)
B u i l d e r : Nikolayev
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1123 tons (surfaced),
1416 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 273930 x 23900 x 13950
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 4200 bhp/2400 shp =
18/10 knots
R a n g e : 14,000 nm at 9 knots surfaced, 130
nm at 2 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 533mm torpedo tubes (6
b o w, 2 stern), total 14 torpedoes, 20
mines, 1 x 100mm gun, 1 x 45mm A A
gun, 2 x 7.62mm machine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 55
N o t e s : This series was an improved version
of the Series XI, with a pair of torpedo
tubes added in the stern and greater test-
depth. All boats served in the Pa c i f i c
Fleet.
The submarine I-25 sank the L-16 off
the Oregon coast in error on 11 October
1942, and the L-19 probably was mined
in the La Perouse Straits on 23 A u g u s t
1945. The surviving boats were stricken
in the late 1950s.

SERIES XII (1937)

M-88 (12 June 1937) M-87 (10 July 1937),
M-89 (9 October 1937), M-91 (12 Octo-
ber 1937), M-92 (12 October 1937), M-
93 (12 October 1937), M-90 (28 Novem-
ber 1937), M-100 (5 September 1939),
M-98 (15 April 1940), M-99 (15 A p r i l
1940), M-101 (1940), M-102 (12 Octo-
ber 1940), M-103 (12 October 1940)
B u i l d e r : Sudomekh
M-57 (25 January 1939), M-58 (28 A p r i l
1939), M-59 (13 June 1939), M-60 ( 2 8
August 1939), M-62 (5 October 1939),
M-63 (5 October 1939), M-31 (25 Fe b-
ruary 1940), M-32 (26 February 1940),
M-33 (23 June 1940), M-34 (23 June
1940), M-35 (20 August 1940), M - 3 6
(20 August 1940)
B u i l d e r : Nikolayev
M-111 (31 December 1940), M-112 (31 De-
cember 1940), M-113 (31 December
1940), M-114 (31 December 1940),
M-115 (31 December 1940), M-116 ( 3 1
December 1940), M-117 (12 Fe b r u a r y
1941), M-118 (12 February 1941), M - 1 2 0
(12 February 1941), M-122 (12 Fe b r u a r y
1941), M-104 Yaroslavskiy Komsomolets
(10 April 1941), M-105 Chelyabinskiy
Komsomolets (10 April 1941), M - 1 0 6
Leninskiy Komsomolets (10 April 1941),
M-107 Novosibirskiy Komsomolets ( 1 6
April 1941), M-108 Penzenskiy Komsomo-
lets (16 April 1941), M-401 (31 May
1941), M-119 (26 June 1941), M-121 ( 1 9
August 1941)
B u i l d e r : Gorkiy
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 206 tons (surfaced), 218
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 146900 x 109100 x 99100
M a c h i n e r y : 1 diesel engine, 1 electric mo-
tor, 1 shaft. 800 bhp/400 shp = 13.5/7.75
knotsA WAR-WINNING WEAPON?:  SOVIET UNION 275

R a n g e : 3440 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 107
nm at 2 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 2 torpedoes, 1 x 45mm A A
gun, 1–2 x 7.62mm machine gun(s)
C o m p l e m e n t : 20
N o t e s : These boats were built to an im-
proved coastal submarine design with
substantially more range but still no tor-
pedo reloads. The M-31 through the M-
6 3, the M - 1 1 1 through the M - 1 1 3, the
M-117, the M-118, and the M-120 went
to the Black Sea Fleet; the M-87 through
the M - 9 3, the M - 1 0 4 through the M -
108, and the M-119, the M-121, and the
M-122 went to the Northern Fleet; the
M - 1 1 4 through the M - 1 1 6 went to the
Pacific Fleet; the M - 4 0 1 went to the
Caspian Sea; the other boats went to the
Baltic Fleet. Two additional boats were
lost incomplete in 1941.
The U - 1 4 9 torpedoed the M - 1 0 1 o f f
Dago Island on 26 June 1941; the M-99
was mined in the Gulf of Finland on 29
June; the U-104 torpedoed the M-94 off
Dago Island on 21 July; the M - 1 0 3 w a s
mined in the Gulf of Finland on 28 Au-
gust; the M - 3 4 failed to return from a
Black Sea patrol in December. The U -
5 8 4 torpedoed the M - 9 2 off the North
Cape on 10 January 1942; the M-95 was
mined near Suursaari Island on 15 June;
the M - 9 3 failed to return from a patrol
off the Norwegian coast the same month;
the M-97 was mined near Lavansaari Is-
land on 14 August; German submarine
chasers sank the M-89 at Batsfjord on 24
August and the M - 3 3 was mined off
Odessa the same day; the M-121 failed to
return from a patrol off the Norwegian
coast in November; the Romanian de-
stroyer Regele Ferdinand I sank the M-59
in the Black Sea on 17 December, and
the M-58 was mined there the next day.
The M-106 was lost off the North Cape
on 5 July 1943; the M - 3 6 was lost off
Sevastopol on 11 September; German
aircraft sank the M-31 south of Takil on
2 October; the M - 8 8 failed to return
from a patrol off the Norwegian coast the
same month, as did the M-91 and the M-
1 2 2 the following month. The M - 1 0 8
also failed to return from a Norwegian
coast patrol in April 1944, and the M-96
was mined off Narva on 10 September.
Three boats were transferred to Bul-
garia in the early 1950s and commis-
sioned as its M-1 through M-3. Two were
returned to the Soviet Union in 1958 in
exchange for two Project 613 boats, and
the third example was stricken in 1967.
The surviving boats were stricken after
World War II.276 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: SOVIET UNION

SERIES XIV (1938)

K-1 (29 April 1938), K-2 (29 April 1938), K-
3 (31 July 1938), K-56 (29 December
1940), K-55 (7 February 1941), K - 5 4
(March 1941), K-57 (1946)
B u i l d e r : Admiralty
K-22 (4 November 1938), K-23 (28 A p r i l
1939), K-52 (5 July 1939), K-51 (30 July
1939), K-21 (14 August 1939), K-53 ( 2
September 1939), K-24 (1940)
B u i l d e r : Baltic
K-58, K-60, K-77, K-78 (1946)
B u i l d e r : Zhdanov
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1490 tons (surfaced),
2140 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 320940 x 24930 x 149100
M a c h i n e r y : 4 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 8400 bhp/2400 shp =
21/10 knots
R a n g e : 14,000 nm at 9 knots surfaced, 160
nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 10 x 533mm torpedo tubes (6
b o w, 2 stern, 2 trainable external
mounts), total 24 torpedoes, 20 mines, 2
x 100mm guns, 2 x 45mm AA guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 60
N o t e s : Mikhail Alekseevich Rudnitskiy de-
signed these large double-hull cruiser
submarines. In addition to mines laid
through two vertical tubes amidships,
these boats originally were to carry a sea-
plane in a hangar abaft the conning
t o w e r, but the aviation proposal was
abandoned. These submarines performed
well and were the best Soviet-designed
boats in service during World War II. All
the class operated with the Northern
Fleet. One additional boat building at
Leningrad was not completed because of
the German siege.
The K - 2 2 was mined off Cape Har-
baken on 6 February 1942; the K-23 was
lost off Okse Fjord on 12 May; the K - 2
failed to return from a patrol off the Nor-
wegian coast in September. The K-3 was
lost off Batsfjord on 21 March 1943, and
the K-1 probably was mined in the Kara
Sea in October. The surviving boats were
stricken in the late 1950s, and the K-21
became a memorial at Severomorsk.

SERIES XV (1940)

M-200 Mest (4 February 1941), M-201 ( 4
February 1941), M-202 Rybnik Donbasa
(4 April 1941), M-203 Irkutskiy Rybak (7
July 1941), M-204 ( 1 9 4 6 ) , M - 2 0 5 – M -
216, M-219, M-231, M-234–253, M-
257, M-258, M-260, M-262, M-266, M-
270–M-291 (1947–1949)
B u i l d e r : Sudomekh
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 281 tons (surfaced), 351
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 162950 x 14950 x 9900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 1600 bhp/875 shp =
15.75/7.75 knots
R a n g e : 4500 nm at 8 knots surfaced, 90
nm at 2 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 4 torpedoes, 1 x 45mm A A
gun, 2 x 7.62mm machine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 24
N o t e s : F. F. Polushkin designed this series
of coastal submarines. They had a single
all-welded pressure hull with saddle bal-
last tanks. The design was a great im-
provement on earlier coastal boats with
its much greater range and heavier tor-
pedo battery. None of the class were
completed during World War II.
Those remaining in Soviet Navy ser-
vice were stricken in the 1960s.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: SWEDEN 277

S W E D E N
U - 1 CLASS (1941)

U-1 (14 June 1941), U-4 (5 June 1943), U-
5 (8 July 1943), U - 6 (18 August 1943),
U-7 (25 November 1943)
B u i l d e r : Kockums
U-2 (16 May 1942), U-3 (11 June 1942), U-
8 (25 April 1944), U-9 (23 May 1944)
B u i l d e r : Karlskrona
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 367 tons (surfaced), 450
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 162990 x 15950 x 12960
M a c h i n e r y : 1 MAN diesel-electric genera-
tor, 2 electric motors, 2 shafts. 1350 shp
= 13/7.5 knots
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 533mm torpedo tubes (3
b o w, 1 external training mount), 1 x
20mm AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 23
N o t e s : Swenzén designed these small
coastal submarines, which introduced
diesel-electric drive and were Sweden’s
first all-welded boats. In 1952–1953
these boats were reﬁtted. One periscope
was removed and replaced with a snorkel,
and the external mount and antiaircraft
gun were landed. The U-4 through the U-
6 again were reconstructed between
1951 and 1954 as streamlined hunter-
killer submarines and named the
Fo r e l l e n, the A b o r r e n, the S i k e n, the
G ä d d e n, the L a x e n, and the M a k r i l l e n.
Displacement rose to 388 tons, and sub-
merged speed increased to 9 knots. The
three early boats were stricken in the
early 1960s, and the later hunter- k i l l e r s
between 1970 and 1976. The U-3 is pre-
served in a museum at Malmö.278 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED KINGDOM

UNITED KINGDOM
X - 1 (16 JUNE 1923)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

B u i l d e r : Chatham
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2425 tons (surfaced),
3600 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 363960 x 299100 x 15990
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Admiralty diesel engines
plus 2 former U-126 diesel engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 7000 bhp/2400
shp = 19.5/8 knots
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 12 torpedoes, 2 x twin 5.250 guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 110
N o t e s : The X - 1 was a cruiser submarine,
almost a complete double-hull type,
equipped with gun armament and fire
control equipment suitable for a surface
action. The former German diesel en-
gines drove the battery-charging genera-
tors, which also could power the electric
motors to boost speed on the surface.
The machinery arrangements gave al-
most continuous trouble, and the boat
was laid up in December 1933 and
scrapped in 1937.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED KINGDOM 279

UNITED KINGDOM: O B E R O N (24 SEPTEMBER 1926)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

B u i l d e r : Chatham
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1311 tons (surfaced),
1831 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 269980 x 28900 x 15960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Admiralty diesel engines, 2
electric motors 2 shafts. 2950 bhp/1350
shp = 13.75/7.5 knots
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 210 torpedo tubes (6 bow, 2
stern), total 16 torpedoes, 1 x 40 gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 54
N o t e s : The O b e r o n was the prototype for
an improved overseas patrol submarine, a
substantial enlargement of the L-class,
with saddle main ballast tanks and oil
fuel tanks outside the pressure hull. It
operated with the Atlantic Fleet until
1937, went into the reserve ﬂeet, and was
recommissioned for training duties dur-
ing World War II. The Oberon was laid up
in July 1944 and scrapped in 1945.280 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED KINGDOM

UNITED KINGDOM: O X L E Y CLASS, O T WAY ( 1 9 2 6 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

[ A u s t r a l i a ] —Oxley (29 June 1926), O t w a y
(7 September 1926)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1354 tons (surfaced), 1872
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 275900 x 27980 x 15990
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Admiralty diesel engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 3100 bhp/1350
shp = 15/8.5 knots
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 210 torpedo tubes (6 bow, 2
stern), total 16 torpedoes, 1 x 40 gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 55
N o t e s : These were modestly enlarged ver-
sions of the O b e r o n for the Royal A u s-
tralian Navy. They were transferred to the
Royal Navy in 1931 and served with the
Atlantic Fleet. The submarine Triton mis-
takenly torpedoed the Oxley off the Nor-
wegian coast on 10 September 1939, and
the Otway was scrapped in 1945.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED KINGDOM 281

O D I N CLASS (1928)

Odin (5 May 1928)
B u i l d e r : Chatham
Osiris (19 May 1928), Oswald (19 June
1928), Otus (31 August 1928)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
Olympus (11 December 1928), Orpheus (26
February 1929)
B u i l d e r : Beardmore
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1475 tons (surfaced),
2038 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 283960 x 299110 x 16910
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Admiralty diesel engines,
2 electric motors, 2 shafts. 4520
bhp/1390 shp = 17.5/8 knots
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 210 torpedo tubes (6 bow,
2 stern), total 14 torpedoes, 1 x 40 gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 53
N o t e s : These were production versions of
the O b e r o n with greater speed. During
World War II they served primarily in the
Mediterranean. The destroyers B a l e n o
and S t r a l e sank the O d i n in the Gulf of
Taranto on 13 June 1940; the destroyer
Turbine sank the Orpheus off Tobruk on
19 June; the destroyer Ugolino Vi v a l d i
rammed and sank the O s w a l d off Cape
Spartivento on 1 August. The O l y m p u s
was mined off Malta on 8 May 1942, and
the two surviving boats were discarded
in 1946.

[ C H I L E ] —C A P I TAN O’BRIEN CLASS (1928)

Capitan O’Brien (2 October 1928), A l m i-
rante Simpson (15 January 1929), C a p i-
tan Thompson (15 January 1929)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1540 tons (surfaced),
2020 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 260900 x 28900 x 13960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 2750 bhp/1300 shp =
15/9 knots
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 210 torpedo tubes (6 bow, 2
stern), total 16 torpedoes, 1 x 4.70 gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 54
N o t e s : These were export versions of the
O l y m p u s, with greater speed and fitted
with enlarged conning towers. They were
discarded in 1957–1958.282 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED KINGDOM

UNITED KINGDOM: IMPROVED OVERSEAS TYPE, PA RT H I A N ( 1 9 2 9 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Perseus (22 May 1929), Poseidon (21 June
1929), Proteus (23 July 1929), Pa n d o r a
(22 August 1929), Regent (11 June
1930), Regulus (11 June 1930), R o v e r
(11 June 1930)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
Parthian (22 June 1929), Rainbow (14 May
1930)
B u i l d e r : Chatham
Phoenix (3 October 1929)
B u i l d e r : Cammell Laird
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1475 tons (surfaced),
2040 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 2 8 9920 (R boats: 287920) x
299110 x 159110
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Admiralty diesel engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 4640 bhp/1635
shp = 17.5/8.5 knots
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 210 torpedo tubes (6 bow, 2
stern), total 14 torpedoes, 1 x 40 gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 53
N o t e s : Improved versions of the O d i n
class. They were designed for deployment
to the Far East, where they served until
World War II. The steamer Yuta acciden-
tally rammed and sank the Po s e i d o n o f f
Wei Hai Wei on 9 June 1931. The other
boats transferred to the Mediterranean
during World War II. The torpedo boat
A l b a t r o s sank the P h o e n i x off A u g u s t a ,
Sicily, on 16 July 1940; the motor vessel
Antonietta Costa rammed and sank the
Rainbow off the Libyan coast in 10 Octo-
ber; the Regulus was mined in the Straits
of Otranto on 26 November. The Perseus
was mined off Cephalonia on December
6, 1941; the Pa n d o r a was bombed at
Malta on 1 April 1942; the R e g e n t a n d
the Pa r t h i a n were mined in the A d r i a t i c
on 18 April and 10 August 1943. The two
surviving boats were broken up in 1946.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED KINGDOM 283

THAMES CLASS (1932)

Thames (26 January 1932), Severn (16 Jan-
uary 1934), Clyde (15 March 1934)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1850 tons (surfaced),
2723 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 345900 x 28930 x 159110
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Admiralty supercharged
diesel engines, 2 electric motors, 2
shafts. 10,000 bhp/2500 shp = 22/10
knots
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 12 torpedoes, 1 x 40 gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 61
N o t e s : These high-speed ﬂeet submarines
were of almost double-hull form and in-
troduced welded external fuel tanks to
eliminate the leakage problem present in
earlier boats with riveted tanks. The Ad-
miralty planned to order as many as
twenty of this class but changed its pol-
i c y. These boats operated with the A t-
lantic and Home ﬂeets. The Thames was
mined in the North Sea on 3 A u g u s t
1940, and the other boats were scrapped
in 1946.284 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED KINGDOM

UNITED KINGDOM: EARLY S CLASS (1931), S A L M O N ( 1 9 3 4 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Swordﬁsh (10 November 1931), Sturgeon (8
January 1932), Seahorse (15 November
1932), S t a r ﬁsh (14 March 1933), S h a r k
(31 May 1934), Snapper (25 October
1934), Sunfish (30 September 1936),
Sterlet (22 September 1937)
B u i l d e r : Chatham
Sealion (16 March 1934), Salmon (30 April
1934), Spearﬁsh (21 April 1936)
B u i l d e r : Cammell Laird
Seawolf (28 November 1935)
B u i l d e r : Scott
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 670 (ﬁrst four boats: 640)
tons (surfaced), 960 (first four boats:
927) tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 2 0 8980 (first four boats:
202920) x 24900 x 119110
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Admiralty diesel engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 1550 bhp/1440
shp = 14/10 knots
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 12 torpedoes, 1 x 30 gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 38–39
N o t e s : These boats were designed for
short-range operations. They had a single
hull with saddle main ballast tanks and
internal fuel tanks. They served primarily
in the Home Fleet. The S t u r g e o n w a s
transferred to The Netherlands in Octo-
ber 1943 as the Zeehond, and the Sunﬁsh
to the Soviet Union in June 1944 as the
V-1. German minesweepers sank the Sea-
horse off the Elbe and the Starﬁsh off He-
ligoland on 7 January and 9 JanuaryA WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED KINGDOM 285

1940; the minesweeper M - 7 5 sank the
Sterlet in the Skagerrak on 14 April; air-
craft so seriously damaged the Shark off
Stavanger that it was scuttled on 6 July;
the Salmon was mined in the North Sea
on 9 July; the U - 3 4 torpedoed the
Spearﬁsh in the North Sea on 1 August;
the S w o r d f i s h was mined in the English
Channel on 7 November. German
minesweepers sank the S n a p p e r o f f
Ushant on 11 February 1941, and the V-
1 was sunk in error by British aircraft off
Norway on 27 July 1944. The S e a l i o n
was scuttled on 3 March 1945, and the
two surviving boats were broken up
1945–1946.

UNITED KINGDOM: P O R P O I S E ( 1 9 3 2 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

B u i l d e r : Barrow
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1500 tons (surfaced),
2053 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 289900 x 299100 x 159110
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Admiralty diesel engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 3300 bhp/1630
shp = 15.5/8.75 knots
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 12 torpedoes, 50 mines, 1 x 40 gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 59
N o t e s : This submarine essentially was a
minelayer version of the overseas patrol
design with the mines carried in the su-
perstructure on a chain conveyor. It
served in the Mediterranean and Far East
and was sunk by Japanese aircraft in the
Malacca Strait on 16 January 1945.286 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED KINGDOM

[ P O RT U G A L ] —DELFIM CLASS (1934)

Delfim (1 May 1934), Espardarte (30 May A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
1934), Golginho (30 May 1934) bow, 2 stern), 1 x 40 gun, 2 x 7.62mm ma-
B u i l d e r : Barrow chine guns
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 800 tons (surfaced), 1092 C o m p l e m e n t : 36
tons (submerged) N o t e s : Vickers designed these submarines
D i m e n s i o n s : 227920 x 21940 x 12980 as diminutives of contemporary British
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Vickers diesel engines, 2 overseas boats. They were discarded in
electric motors, 2 shafts. 2300 bhp/1000 the 1950s.
shp = 16.5/9.25 knots
R a n g e : 5000 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 110
nm at 4 knots submerged
G R A M P U S CLASS (1935)

Narwhal (29 August 1935), Rorqual (21 July N o t e s : These minelayers used a hull form
1936) similar to the Thames class with internal
B u i l d e r : Barrow fuel tanks and an almost complete dou-
Grampus (25 February 1936), Seal (27 Sep- ble hull. They served with the Mediter-
tember 1938) ranean and Home fleets. The S e a l w a s
B u i l d e r : Chatham damaged by a mine in the Kattegat on 4
Cachalot (2 December 1937) May 1940 and surrendered to German
B u i l d e r : Scott forces the following day. It served brieﬂy
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1520 tons (surfaced), for training as the UB and was scuttled in
2157 tons (submerged) May 1945. The torpedo boat Polluce sank
D i m e n s i o n s : 293900 x 25960 x 169100 the G r a m p u s off Syracuse on 16 June
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Admiralty diesel engines, 2 1940; German aircraft sank the Narwhal
electric motors, 2 shafts. 3300 bhp/1630 off Norway on 23 July; and the torpedo
shp = 15.75/8.75 knots boat Generale Achille Pa p a rammed and
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow), sank the C a c h a l o t off Benghazi on 30
total 12 torpedoes, 50 mines, 1 x 40 gun July 1941. The Rorqual was broken up in
C o m p l e m e n t : 59 1946.
[ E S T O N I A ] —KALEV CLASS (1936)

Lembit (7 July 1936), Kalev (1937)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 620 tons (surfaced), 850
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 190930 x 239110 x 109100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Vickers diesel engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 1200 bhp/790
shp = 13.5/8.5 knots
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), 20 mines, 1 x 45mm AA gun, 1 x
20mm AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 38
N o t e s : Vickers designed these submarine
minelayers with single hulls, saddle main
ballast tanks, and mine chutes in the
tanks. They were taken over by the Soviet
Union in August 1940. The K a l e v w a s
mined off Hangö in November 1940. The
Lembit was renamed the U-1 in 1945 and
the S-85 in 1949. It was used for experi-
mental trials until 1956 and became a
memorial ship at Tallinn in 1979.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED KINGDOM 287

UNITED KINGDOM: T CLASS (1937), T H E R M O P Y L A E (1945)
(as re c o n s t ructed postwar)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Triton (5 October 1937), Triumph (16 Feb-
ruary 1938), Thistle (25 October 1938),
Triad (5 May 1939), Truant (5 May
1939), Tetrarch (14 November 1939),
Trusty (14 March 1941), Turbulent ( 1 2
May 1941), Tutankhamen (5 March
1942), Trespasser (29 May 1942), Taurus
(27 June 1942), Tactician (29 July 1942),
Truculent (12 September 1942), Templar
(26 October 1942), Tally Ho (23 Decem-
ber 1942), Tantalus (24 February 1943),
Tantivy (6 April 1943), Telemachus ( 1 9
June 1943), Talent (17 July 1943), Te r-
rapin (31 August 1943), Thorough ( 3 0
October 1943), Tiptoe (25 Fe b r u a r y
1944), Trump (25 March 1944), Taciturn
(7 June 1944), Tapir (21 August 1944),
Tarn (29 November 1944), Tasman ( 1 3
February 1945), Teredo (27 April 1945)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
Thetis (29 June 1938), Trident (7 December
1938), Taku (20 May 1939), Ta l i s m a n
(29 January 1940), Thrasher (28 Novem-
ber 1940), Thorn (18 March 1941), Tem-
pest (10 June 1940)
B u i l d e r : Cammell Laird
Tribune (8 December 1938), Tarpon (17 Oc-
tober 1939), Tuna (10 May 1940), Trav-
eller (27 August 1941), Trooper (5 March
1942), Tabard (21 November 1945)
B u i l d e r : Scott
Tigris (31 October 1939), Torbay (9 A p r i l
1940), Tradewind (11 December 1942),
Trenchant (24 March 1943), Turpin ( 5
August 1944), Thermopylae (27 June
1945)
B u i l d e r : Chatham
Tudor (23 September 1942), Thule (22 Oc-
tober 1942), Totem (28 September 1943),
Truncheon (22 February 1944)288 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED KINGDOM

B u i l d e r : Devonport
Tireless (19 March 1943), Token (19 March
1943), Thor (18 April 1944), Tiara ( 1 8
April 1944)
B u i l d e r : Portsmouth DY
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1090 tons (surfaced),
1575 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 275900 x 26970 x 14980
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 2500 bhp/1450 shp =
15.25/9 knots
A r m a m e n t : 11 (ﬁrst twelve boats: 10) x 210
torpedo tubes (6 bow, 4–5 external), total
16–17 torpedoes, 1 x 40 gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 59–61
N o t e s : This class of patrol submarines
constantly evolved as construction con-
tinued through World War II. It was a
single-hull design with saddle main bal-
last tanks and a very heavy torpedo bat-
t e r y. All but the first few boats had
welded framing, and the ﬁnal dozen were
of all-welded construction. The T h e t i s
sank on trials in Liverpool Bay on 1 June
1939 and was salved and recommis-
sioned as the Thunderbolt.
The U-4 torpedoed the Thistle off the
Norwegian coast on 10 April 1940; the
Q-ship Schiff 40 sank the Tarpon in the
North Sea on the same day; the subma-
rine Enrico To t i sank the Tr i a d off Cal-
abria on 15 October; Italian torpedo
boats probably sank the Tr i t o n in the
Adriatic on 6 December. The Te t r a r c h
and the Triumph probably were mined off
the Sicilian coast and in the Cyclades on
27 October and 31 December 1941. The
torpedo boat C i r c e sank the Te m p e s t i n
the Gulf of Taranto on 12 February 1942;
the torpedo boat Pe g a s o sank the T h o r n
near Crete on 7 August; the Talisman was
mined near Sicily on 17 September; the
Traveller probably was mined in the Gulf
of Taranto on 4 December. The Tu-
t a n k h a m e n was mined off Sardinia on 2
January 1943; the antisubmarine vessel
Uj–2210 sank the Tigris off Capri on 27
February; the corvette C i c o g n a sank the
Thunderbolt off Sicily on 14 March; the
Turbulent was mined off Sardinia on the
same date, and the Trooper was mined in
the Aegean on 10 October. Japanese anti-
submarine vessels badly damaged the
Te r r a p i n off Batavia on 19 May 1945,
and it was scrapped without being
repaired.
The merchant ship Dvina accidentally
rammed and sank the Tr u c u l e n t in the
Thames estuary on 12 January 1950, and
the Templar and the Tantivy were sunk as
targets in the 1950s. The surviving pre-
war boats were scrapped between 1945
and 1947, while 13 of the later boats
were partially reconstructed for improved
underwater performance. They were
scrapped between 1960 and 1970.
The Taurus, the Talent, the Tapir, and
the Tarn were transferred to The Nether-
lands between 1943 and 1948 as the
D o l f i j n, the Z w a a r d v i s c h, the Z e e h o n d,
and the Tijgerhaai. The Totem, the Trun-
cheon, and the Turpin were transferred to
Israel between 1964 and 1968 as the
Dakar, the Dolphin, and the Leviathan.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED KINGDOM 289

S H O RT HULL U CLASS (1937)

Undine (5 October 1937), Unity (16 Febru-
ary 1938), Ursula (16 February 1938),
Utmost (20 April 1940), Upright (21 April
1940), Unique (6 June 1940), Usk ( 7
June 1940), Upholder (8 July 1940), Un-
beaten (9 July 1940), Urge (19 A u g u s t
1940), Undaunted (20 August 1940),
Urchin (30 September 1940), Union ( 1
October 1940), P-31 (27 November
1940), P-32 (15 December 1940), P - 3 3
(28 January 1941), P-34 (11 Fe b r u a r y
1941), P-35 (15 March 1941), P-36 (28
April 1941), P-37 (12 May 1941), P - 3 8
(9 July 1941), P-39 (23 August 1941), P-
41 (24 August 1941), P-42 (4 November
1941), P-43 (5 November 1941), P - 4 4
(18 December 1941), P-46 (19 Decem-
ber 1941), P-45 (16 February 1942), P -
54 (17 February 1942), P-48 (15 A p r i l
1942), P-51 (16 April 1942), P-47 ( 2 7
July 1942), P-49 (28 July 1942), P - 5 2
(11 October 1942), P-53 (12 October
1942), P-64 (23 November 1942), P - 6 5
(24 November 1942), Varne (22 January
1943), Vox (23 January 1943)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
Umpire (30 December 1940), Una (10 June
1941)
B u i l d e r : Chatham
P-55 (28 July 1942), P-56 (24 September
1942), P-57 (10 November 1942), P - 5 8
(8 December 1942), Untiring (20 Janu-
ary 1943), Varangian (4 March 1943),
Uther (6 April 1943), Unswerving ( 1 9
July 1943)
B u i l d e r : Armstrong
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 540 tons (surfaced), 730
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 1 9 1900– 1 9 691 00 x 16910 x
15920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Paxman diesel engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 615 bhp/825
shp = 11.25/10 knots
A r m a m e n t : 4 (first three boats: 6) x 210
torpedo tubes (4 bow, 2 external), total
8–10 torpedoes, 1 x 30 gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 27–33
N o t e s : These single hull submarines with
saddle main ballast tanks were designed
for use as training vessels and for short-
range patrol operations. They employed
diesel-electric drive while surfaced. The
bulk of their service was in the Mediter-
ranean, where their small size proved an
advantage and they were very successful.
German minesweepers sank the U n-
d i n e off Heligoland on 7 January 1940,
and the Norwegian steamer Atle Ja r l a c-
cidentally rammed and sank the U n i t y
off the Tyne on 29 April. The U s k w a s
mined off Cape Bon on 26 April 1941;
the torpedo boat Pe g a s o probably sank
the U n d a u n t e d off the Libyan coast on
12 May; the trawler Peter Hendricks a c-
cidentally rammed and sank the U m p i r e
off the Suffolk coast on 19 July; the tor-
pedo boat C i r c e sank the Union off Pa n-
t e l l a r i a on 20 July; the P - 3 2 and the P - 3 3
were mined off Tripoli on 18 August and
20 August. The torpedo boat C i r c e s a n k
the P-38 off Tripoli on 23 Fe b r u a r y
1942; the P - 3 9 and the P - 3 6 were sunk
by aircraft at Malta on 26 March and 1
April; the torpedo boat Pe g a s o sank the
U p h o l d e r near Tripoli on 14 April and
probably the U r g e in the same area on 29
April; the U n i q u e failed to return from a
patrol in the Bay of Biscay in October;
British aircraft accidentally sank the U n-
b e a t e n in the same area on 11 Novem-
ber; the torpedo boat G r o p p o sank the
U t m o s t near Sicily on 25 November; the
torpedo boat A r d e n t e sank the P - 4 8 o f f
Tunisia on 25 December. The Va n d a l
sank in an accident in the Clyde on 24
February 1943, the Untamed in another290 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED KINGDOM

near Campbeltown on 30 May, and the
antisubmarine vessel U j – 2 2 0 8 sank
the U s u r p e r in the Gulf of Genoa on
3 October.
Several boats served with Allied navies
during World War II (Poland–2,
The Netherlands–1, Soviet Union–2,
Norway–2). The P-52 went to the Royal
Danish Navy as the Springeren b e t w e e n
1946 and 1957, and the Untiring and the
U p s t a r t to the Greek Navy as the X i f i a s
and the A m f i t r i t i i between 1945 and
1952. The remainder of the class were
scrapped between 1946 and 1950.

[ T U R K E Y ] —ORUC REIS CLASS (1940)

Oruc Reis (19 July 1940), Murat Reis ( 2 0
July 1940), Burak Reis (19 October
1940), Ulac Ali Reis (1 November 1940)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 624 tons (surfaced), 856
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 201970 x 22940 x 119100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Vickers diesel engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 1200 bhp/780
shp = 13.75/8.5 knots
A r m a m e n t : 5 x 210 torpedo tubes (4 bow, 1
external), total 9 torpedoes, 1 x 40 gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 35
N o t e s : The design for these boats was a
modestly enlarged version of the original
S-class. They were taken over while un-
der construction and commissioned as
the P-611, the P-612, the P-614, and the
P - 6 1 5. The U - 1 2 3 torpedoed the P - 6 1 5
off the Liberian coast on 18 April 1943.
The first two boats were returned to
Turkey in 1942, and the P-614 in 1945.
They reverted to their original names and
were discarded in 1957.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED KINGDOM 291

UNITED KINGDOM: LATER S CLASS (1941)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

P-222 (20 September 1941), Seraph ( 2 5
October 1941), Shakespeare (8 Decem-
ber 1941)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
Safari (18 November 1941), Sahib (19 Janu-
ary 1942), Saracen (16 February 1942),
Sibyl (29 April 1942), Seadog (11 June
1942), Sea Nymph (29 July 1942), Sickle
(27 August 1942), Simoom (12 October
1942), Stubborn (11 November 1942),
Surf (10 December 1942), Syrtis (4 Feb-
ruary 1943), Stonehenge (23 March
1943), Stoic (9 April 1943), Storm ( 1 8
May 1943), Stratagem (21 June 1943),
Spirit (20 July 1943), Statesman (14 Sep-
tember 1943), Sturdy (30 September
1943), Stygian (30 November 1943),
Subtle (27 January 1944), Supreme ( 2 4
February 1944), Sea Scout (24 March
1944), Selene (24 April 1944), Solent (8
June 1944), Sleuth (6 July 1944), S i d o n
(4 September 1944), Spearhead (2 Octo-
ber 1944), Spur (17 November 1944),
Scorcher (18 December 1944), Sanguine
(15 February 1945), Saga (14 March
1945), Springer (14 May 1945)
B u i l d e r : Cammell Laird
Satyr (28 September 1942), Sceptre (9 Janu-
ary 1943), Sea Rover (18 February 1943),
Sirdar (26 March 1943), Spiteful (5 June
1943), Strongbow (30 August 1943),
Spark (28 December 1943), Scythian (14
April 1944), Scotsman (18 August 1944),
Sea Devil (30 January 1944), S e n e s c h a l
(23 April 1945), Sentinel (27 July 1945)
B u i l d e r : Scott
Splendid (19 January 1942), Sportsman (17
April 1942), Shalimar (22 April 1943)
B u i l d e r : Chatham
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 715 tons (surfaced), 990
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 217900 x 23990 x 14920292 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED KINGDOM

M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 1900 bhp/1300 shp =
14.75/9 knots
A r m a m e n t : 7 (last 17 boats: 6) x 210 t o r-
pedo tubes (6 bow, 1 external), total
12–13 torpedoes, 1 x 30 or 40 gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 48
N o t e s : These submarines were improved
versions of the earlier S class. They all
featured welded framing, and the ﬁnal 15
boats were of all-welded construction.
Most added a 20mm antiaircraft gun dur-
ing the war.
The torpedo boat Fo r t u n a l e p r o b a b l y
sank the P-222 off Capri on 12 Decem-
ber 1942. The German destroyer Hermes
sank the S p l e n d i d off Capri on 21 A p r i l
1943; the corvette E u t e r p e sank the
Sahib off Sicily on 24 April; the corvette
M i n e r v a sank the Saracen off Bastia on
14 August; the S i m o o m was probably
mined in the Aegean on 19 November.
Mines claimed the S t o n e h e n g e in the
Malacca Strait on 16 March 1944, the
S y r t i s off Bodo on 28 March, and the
Sickle in the Aegean on 16 June, while a
Japanese antisubmarine vessel sank the
Stratagem off Malacca on 22 November.
The S p e a r h e a d, the S a g a, and the
S p u r went to Portugal as the N e p t u n o,
the N a u t i l o, and the N a r v a l in 1948. The
S a t y r, the S p i t e f u l, the S p o r t s m a n, and
the S t a t e s m a n went to France in 1951 as
the S a p h i r, the S i r è n e, the S i b y l l e, and
the S u l t a n e. The S p r i n g e r and the S a n-
g u i n e went to Israel as the Ta n i n and the
R a h a v in 1958. The S e r a p h, the S c e p t r e,
the S e l e n e, the S o l e n t, and the S l e u t h
were converted into high-speed under-
water targets. The Sidon sank after an
internal explosion on 16 June 1951 at
Portsmouth. Most of the remaining
boats were discarded by the early 1950s,
and the ﬁnal examples were scrapped by
1 9 6 2 .

LONG HULL U CLASS (1943)

Venturer (4 May 1943), Viking (5 May
1943), Veldt (19 July 1943), Vampire (20
July 1943), Vox (28 September 1943),
Vigorous (15 October 1943), Virtue ( 2 9
November 1943), Visigoth (30 November
1943), Upshot (24 February 1944), U r-
tica (23 March 1944), Vineyard (8 May
1944), Variance (22 May 1944), Vengeful
(20 July 1944), Vortex (19 August 1944),
Vagabond (19 September 1944)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
Vivid (15 September 1943), Voracious ( 1 1
November 1943), Vulpine (28 December
1943), Varne (24 February 1944), Vi r u-
lent (23 May 1944), Volatile (20 June
1944), Votary (21 August 1944)
B u i l d e r : Armstrong
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 545 tons (surfaced), 740
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 204960 x 16910 x 15930
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Paxman diesel engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 615 bhp/825
shp = 11.25/10 knots
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 8 torpedoes, 1 x 30 gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 33
N o t e s : This class repeated the earlier
group but incorporated a longer bow with
a ﬁner entrance. Twenty additional boats
were canceled. During and after Wo r l d
War II, France received three boats, Nor-
way four, Greece four, and Denmark two.
Most of the class were scrapped by 1950,
and all were broken up by 1959.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED KINGDOM 293

UNITED KINGDOM: A CLASS (1944), A RT F U L ( 1 9 4 7 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Amphion (31 August 1944), Astute (30 Jan-
uary 1945), Auriga (29 March 1945), Al-
cide (12 April 1945), Alderney (25 June
1945), Alliance (28 July 1945), Au r o c h s
(28 July 1945), Ambush (24 September
1945), Anchorite (22 January 1946), An-
drew (6 April 1946)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
Affray (12 April 1945), Aeneas (25 October
1945), Alaric (18 February 1946),
Acheron (25 March 1947)
B u i l d e r : Cammell Laird
Ace (1945), Achates (1945)
B u i l d e r : Devonport
Artemis (26 August 1946), Artful (22 May
1947)
B u i l d e r : Scott
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1120 tons (surfaced),
1620 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 279930 x 22930 x 17910
M a c h i n e r y : 2 supercharged diesel en-
gines, 2 electric motors, 2 shafts. 4300
bhp/1250 shp = 18.5/8 knots
A r m a m e n t : 10 x 210 torpedo tubes (4 bow,
2 stern, 4 external), total 16 torpedoes, 1
x 40 gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 61
N o t e s : These boats were of all-welded con-
struction and were designed for operation
in the Far East. They had an almost com-
plete double hull and introduced air
conditioning and other habitability im-
provements. An additional 50 vessels of
this class were ordered or projected.
None of these boats saw any service dur-
ing World War II.294 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED STAT E S

The A f f r a y sank in an accident in the
English Channel on 16 April 1951.
The rest of the class except the Au r o c h s
were modernized between 1955 and
1960 with enlarged batteries, modified
bows, streamlined sails, and upgraded
electronics and sonar, increasing their
submerged speed to 15 knots. They
were scrapped between 1970 and 1974
except the A l l i a n c e, which is preserved
as a memorial at Gosport.

UNITED STAT E S
BARRACUDA CLASS (1924)

Barracuda (17 July 1924), Bass (27 Decem-
ber 1924), Bonita (9 June 1925)
B u i l d e r : Portsmouth
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2119 tons (surfaced),
2506 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 334960 x 27970 x 15920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 diesel elec-
tric generators, 2 shafts. 6200 bhp =
18.75/9 knots
R a n g e : 6000 nm at 11 knots surfaced, 50
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (4 bow, 2
stern), 1 x 50 gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 85
N o t e s : These very large submarines were
designed to operate with the ﬂeet. In an
effort to endow them with high surface
speed they used both direct drive diesel
engines and diesel electric generators
while operating on the surface (known as
composite drive). They received new
diesel engines in the mid-1930s. During
World War II they served primarily as
training submarines, and they were
stricken on 10 March 1945.A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED STAT E S 295

[ S PAIN]—C CLASS (1927)

C1 (31 March 1927), C2 (4 May 1928), C3
(20 February 1929), C 4 (6 July 1929),
C 5 (28 October 1929), C 6 (26 Decem-
ber 1929)
B u i l d e r : Cartagena
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 916 tons (surfaced), 1290
tons (submerged
D i m e n s i o n s : 247900 x 209100 x 1396
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 2000 bhp/750 shp =
16/8.5 knots
R a n g e : 4000 nm at 6.5 knots surfaced, 125
nm at 4.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern), total 12 torpedoes, 1 x
75mm AA gun.
C o m p l e m e n t : 46
N o t e s : These boats were built to an Elec-
tric Boat design under license and were
enlarged versions of the previous B class
with 533mm torpedo tubes in place the
earlier type’s 450mm tubes. Four boats
served with the Spanish Republican Navy
during the Spanish Civil Wa r. The Ger-
man U - 3 4 torpedoed the C 3 off Malaga
on 12 December 1936; the C5 was lost in
the Bay of Biscay the same month; the
C6 was scuttled at Gijon on 10 October
1937; Nationalist aircraft sank the C1 at
Barcelona on 9 October 1938. The C 2
and the C4 were reﬁtting in France when
the war began. They were interned until
1939 and returned to Spain. The C4 was
lost in an accident in June 1946, and the
C2 was discarded in 1952.

ARGONAUT (10 NOVEMBER 1927)

B u i l d e r : Portsmouth
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2878 tons (surfaced),
4045 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 381900 x 33980 x 16900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2
diesel electric generators, 2 shafts. 3175
bhp/2200 shp = 13.5/7.5 knots
R a n g e : 18,000 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 50
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
60 mines, 2 x 60 guns, 2 x 0.30 machine
guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 86
N o t e s : The A r g o n a u t was the U.S. Navy’s
only dedicated minelaying submarine and
carried its mines in two horizontal tubes
discharging at the stern. It had an excep-
tionally long range and was ﬁtted with a
bow modeled after the big German sub-
marine cruisers to improve its surface
performance. The A r g o n a u t was con-
verted to a transport submarine in Sep-
tember 1942. The destroyers Isokaze and
M a i k a z e, assisted by aircraft, sank it in
the Solomon Sea on 10 January 1943.296 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED STAT E S

UNITED STATES: N A RW H A L CLASS (1927), N A U T I L U S (1930)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Narwhal (17 December 1927), Nautilus (15
March 1930)
B u i l d e r : Mare Island
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2987 tons (surfaced),
3960 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 371900 x 33930 x 169110
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 diesel elec-
tric generators, 2 shafts. 5633 bhp/1600
shp = 17.5/8 knots
R a n g e : 18,000 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 50
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (4 bow, 2
stern), 2 x 60 guns, 2 x 0.30 machine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 89
N o t e s : These submarines were the largest
in the U.S. Navy until after World War II
and were similar to the Argonaut, w i t h
two torpedo tubes replacing the mine
tubes. In early 1943 they received four
additional external torpedo tubes, two ﬁr-
ing forward and two ﬁring aft. They were
stricken in May 1945.

D O L P H I N (8 MARCH 1932)

B u i l d e r : Portsmouth
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1688 tons (surfaced),
2215 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 319930 x 279110 x 13910
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 diesel elec-
tric generators, 2 shafts. 3500 bhp/1750
shp = 17/8 knots
R a n g e : 6000 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 50
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (4 bow, 2
stern), total 18 torpedoes, 1 x 40 gun, 4 x
0.30 machine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 63A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED STAT E S 297

N o t e s : The Dolphin was designed as a rel-
atively slow, long-range submarine for pa-
trol operations in the Pacific. Its small
size, relative to the earlier types, reduced
its range and overall performance sub-
s t a n t i a l l y. The Dolphin operated primar-
ily in a training role during World War II
and was stricken on 24 October 1945.

UNITED STATES: C A C H A L O T CLASS, C U T T L E F I S H (1933)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Cachalot (19 October 1933)
B u i l d e r : Portsmouth
Cuttleﬁsh (21 November 1933)
B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1120 tons (surfaced),
1650 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 271910 x 24990 x 14900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 2770 bhp/1600 shp =
17/8 knots
R a n g e : 11,000 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 50
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (4 bow, 2
stern), total 16 torpedoes, 1 x 30 gun, 3 x
0 . 50 machine guns, 4 x 0.30 machine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 51
N o t e s : This class dispensed with compos-
ite drive and relied on diesel engine
propulsion only on the surface, saving
space and weight. It also featured exten-
sive use of welded construction and car-
ried a much lighter deck gun battery.
These submarines were the first in the
U.S. Navy to embark torpedo ﬁre control
computers. They undertook operational
patrols until 1943, then transferred to
training duties until they were stricken in
November 1945.298 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED STAT E S

SHARK CLASS (1935)

Shark (21 May 1935), Tarpon (4 September
1935)
B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1315 tons (surfaced),
1968 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 298900 x 25910 x 15910
M a c h i n e r y : 4 diesel-electric power units,
2 electric motors, 2 shafts. 4300
bhp/2085 shp = 19.5/8 knots
R a n g e : 11,000 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 50
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (4 bow, 2
stern), total 16 torpedoes, 1 x 30 gun, 2 x
0 . 50 machine guns, 4 x 0.30 m a c h i n e
guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 54

P O R P O I S E CLASS (1935)

Porpoise (20 June 1935), Pike (12 Septem-
ber 1935)
B u i l d e r : Portsmouth
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1316 tons (surfaced),
1934 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 301900 x 249110 x 14910
M a c h i n e r y : 4 diesel-electric power units,
2 electric motors, 2 shafts. 4300
bhp/2085 shp = 19/10 knots
R a n g e : 11,000 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 50
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (4 bow, 2
stern), total 16 torpedoes, 1 x 30 gun, 2 x
0 . 50 machine guns, 4 x 0.30 m a c h i n e
guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 54A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED STAT E S 299

UNITED STATES: P E R C H CLASS (1936), P O M PA N O (1937)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Perch (9 May 1936), Pickerel (7 July 1936),
Permit (5 October 1936)
B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
Plunger (8 July 1936), Pollack (15 Septem-
ber 1936)
B u i l d e r : Portsmouth
Pompano (11 March 1937)
B u i l d e r : Mare Island
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1330 tons (surfaced),
1997 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 300960 x 25920 x 15920
M a c h i n e r y : 4 diesel-electric power units,
2 electric motors, 2 shafts. 4300
bhp/2366 shp = 19.25/8 knots
R a n g e : 11,000 nm at 10 knots surfaced,
50 nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (4 bow, 2
stern), total 16 torpedoes, 1 x 30 gun, 2 x
0 . 50 machine guns, 4 x 0.30 m a c h i n e
guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 54
N o t e s : These three classes (S h a r k, Po r-
p o i s e, and Pe r c h) introduced high-speed
diesel engines, diesel-electric drive, and
air conditioning into a hull slightly
larger than that of the C a c h a l o t class, to
reduce machinery space crowding. They
were very successful and set the pattern
for subsequent production. Two addi-
tional external forward-firing torpedo
tubes were added to the Po r p o i s e, the
P i k e, the Ta r p o n, the P i c k e r e l, and the
Pe r m i t in early 1942, and all surviving
boats received additional antiaircraft
weapons and reduced superstructures
from mid-1943.300 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED STAT E S

The destroyer Yamakaze sank the
S h a r k in the Celebes Islands on 11 Fe b-
ruary 1942; Japanese destroyers forced
the Pe r c h to the surface in the Java Sea
on 3 March, and it was scuttled; the
P i c k e r e l failed to return from a patrol off
Honshu in April 1943; the Po m p a n o p r o b-
ably was mined off the Japanese coast on
29 August. The surviving boats were
stricken in 1956.

UNITED STATES: S A L M O N CLASS, S N A P P E R (1937)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Salmon (12 June 1937), Seal (25 A u g u s t
1937), Skipjack (23 October 1937)
B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
Snapper (24 August 1937), Stingray (6 Oc-
tober 1937)
B u i l d e r : Portsmouth
Sturgeon (15 March 1938)
B u i l d e r : Mare Island
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1449 tons (surfaced),
2210 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 308900 x 26920 x 15970
M a c h i n e r y : 4 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 5500 bhp/2660 shp =
21/9 knots
R a n g e : 11,000 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 50
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 210 torpedo tubes (4 bow, 4
stern), total 24 torpedoes, 1 x 30 gun, 2 x
0 . 50 machine guns, 2 x 0.30 m a c h i n e
guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 59A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED STAT E S 301

UNITED STATES: S A R G O CLASS (1938)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Sargo (6 June 1938), Saury (20 A u g u s t
1938), Spearﬁsh (29 October 1938)
B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
Sculpin (27 July 1938), Squalus (14 Sep-
tember 1938)
B u i l d e r : Portsmouth
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1450 tons (surfaced),
2215 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 310960 x 269100 x 16980
M a c h i n e r y : 4 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 5500 bhp/2740 shp =
20/8.75 knots
R a n g e : 11,000 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 50
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 210 torpedo tubes (4 bow, 4
stern), total 24 torpedoes, 1 x 30 gun, 2 x
0 . 50 machine guns, 2 x 0.30 machine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 59
N o t e s : These two classes (S a l m o n a n d
Sargo) reverted to composite drive, using
high-speed diesel engines, and added two
torpedo tubes at the stern. An accident
sank the S q u a l u s at Portsmouth on 23
May 1939. It was raised, repaired, and
recommissioned as the S a i l f i s h in May
1940. Surviving boats received additional
antiaircraft weapons and reduced super-
structures from 1943.
The destroyer Yamagumo sank the
Sculpin off Truk on 19 November 1943.
The surviving boats were stricken
1946–1948.302 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED STAT E S

SEADRAGON CLASS (1939)

Swordﬁsh (1 April 1939)
B u i l d e r : Mare Island
Seadragon (21 April 1939), Sealion (25 May
1939)
B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
Searaven (21 June 1939), Seawolf (15 A u-
gust 1939)
B u i l d e r : Portsmouth
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1450 tons (surfaced),
2215 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 310960 x 269100 x 16980
M a c h i n e r y : 4 diesel-electric power units,
2 electric motors, 2 shafts. 5200
bhp/2740 shp = 20/8.75 knots
R a n g e : 11,000 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 50
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 210 torpedo tubes (4 bow, 4
stern), total 24 torpedoes, 1 x 30 gun, 2 x
0 . 50 machine guns, 2 x 0.30 m a c h i n e
guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 59
N o t e s : This class reintroduced diesel-
electric drive, but otherwise duplicated
the preceding group of submarines. Sur-
viving boats received additional antiair-
craft weapons and reduced superstruc-
tures from 1943.
The Sealion was scuttled at Cavite on
25 December 1941; the destroyer escort
Richard M. Rowell sank the S e a w o l f i n
error off Morotai on 3 October 1944; the
S w o r d f i s h failed to return from a patrol
off Okinawa in January 1945. The surviv-
ing boats were stricken in 1948.

TAMBOR CLASS (1939)

Tambor (20 December 1939), Tautog ( 2 7
January 1940), Thresher (27 March
1940), Gar (7 November 1940), G r a m-
pus (23 December 1940), Grayback ( 3 1
January 1941)
B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
Triton (25 March 1940), Trout (21 May
1940), Grayling (4 September 1940),
Grenadier (29 November 1940)
B u i l d e r : Portsmouth
Tuna (2 October 1940), Gudgeon (25 Janu-
ary 1941)
B u i l d e r : Mare Island
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1475 tons (surfaced),
2370 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 307920 x 27930 x 15900
M a c h i n e r y : 4 diesel-electric power units,
2 electric motors, 2 shafts. 5400
bhp/2740 shp = 20/8.75 knots
R a n g e : 11,000 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 50
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 10 x 210 torpedo tubes (6 bow,
4 stern), total 24 torpedoes, 1 x 30 gun, 2
x 0.50 machine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 60
N o t e s : This class was similar to the previ-
ous type and added two forward torpedo
tubes. Surviving boats received additional
antiaircraft weapons and reduced super-
structures from 1943.
The destroyers M i n e g u m o a n d
Murasame sank the Grampus in Blackett
Strait on 5 March 1943; the destroyer
Satsuki sank the Triton north of the Ad-
miralty Islands on 15 March; Japanese
aircraft bombed the G r e n a d i e r in the
Lem Voalan Strait on 21 April; the
Grayling failed to return from a patrol inA WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED STAT E S 303

Lingayen Gulf in September. Japanese
carrier aircraft sank the Grayback in the
East China Sea on 27 February 1944; the
destroyers A s a s h i m o and O k i n a m i s a n k
the Trout in the Philippine Sea two days
later; the Gudgeon failed to return from a
patrol in the Saipan area in April. The
surviving boats were stricken after World
War II.

MACKEREL (28 SEPTEMBER 1940)

B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 825 tons (surfaced), 1190
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 243910 x 22910 x 14900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel-electric power units,
2 electric motors, 2 shafts. 1680 bhp/
1500 shp = 16.25/9 knots
R a n g e : 6000 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 50
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (4 bow, 2
stern), total 12 torpedoes, 1 x 30 gun, 2 x
0 . 50 machine guns, 2 x 0.30 m a c h i n e
guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 42

M A R L I N (29 JANUARY 1941)

B u i l d e r : Portsmouth
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 800 tons (surfaced), 1165
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 2389110 x 21980 x 13900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel-electric power units,
2 electric motors, 2 shafts. 1680 bhp/
1500 shp = 16.25/9 knots
R a n g e : 6000 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 50
nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (4 bow, 2
stern), total 12 torpedoes, 1 x 30 gun, 2 x
0 . 50 machine guns, 2 x 0.30 machine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 42
N o t e s : These two boats (M a c k e r e l a n d
M a r l i n) were built as prototypes for
shorter range submarines intended to
protect the Hawai’ian Islands and the
Continental West Coast. They were not
effective for Paciﬁc operations and served
primarily as training vessels until they
were stricken in 1946–1947.304 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED STAT E S

UNITED STATES: G AT O CLASS (1941)
[ I TA LY ] —ENRICO TA Z Z O L I (E X - B A R B, 1942) AFTER GUPPY IB CONVERSION
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Drum (12 May 1941), Flying Fish (9 July
1941), Finback (25 August 1941), H a d-
dock (20 October 1941), Halibut (3 De-
cember 1941), Herring (15 January 1942),
K i n g ﬁsh (2 March 1942), Shad (15 A p r i l
1942), Runner (30 May 1942), S a w ﬁsh ( 2 3
June 1942), Scamp (20 July 1942), S c o r-
pion (20 July 1942), Snook (15 A u g u s t
1942), Steelhead (11 September 1942)
B u i l d e r : Portsmouth
Gato (21 August 1941), Greenling (20 Sep-
tember 1941), Grouper (27 October
1941), Growler (22 November 1941),
Grunion (22 December 1941), G u a r d ﬁs h
(20 January 1942), Albacore (17 Fe b r u a r y
1942), Amberjack (6 March 1942), B a r b
(2 April 1942), B l a c k ﬁsh (18 April 1942),
Gunnel (17 May 1942), Gurnard (1 June
1942), Haddo (21 June 1942), Hake ( 1 7
July 1942), Harder (19 August 1942), H o e
(17 September 1942), Jack (16 October
1942), Lapon (27 October 1942), M i n g o
(30 November 1942), Muskallunge ( 1 3
December 1942), Paddle (30 December
1942), Pargo (24 January 1943), B l u e ﬁs h
(21 February 1943), Bonefish (7 March
1943), Cod (21 March 1943), Cero ( 4
April 1943), Dace (25 April 1943), C o r v-
ina (9 May 1943), Dorado (23 May 1943),
Darter (6 June 1943), Flasher (20 June
1943), Angler (4 July 1943), Flier (11 July
1943), Bashaw (25 July 1943), Bluegill ( 8
August 1943), Flounder (22 A u g u s t
1943), Gabilan (19 September 1943),
Bream (17 October 1943), Cavalla ( 1 4
November 1943), Cobia (28 November
1943), Croaker ( 1 9 December 1943)
B u i l d e r : Electric BoatA WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED STAT E S 305

Silversides (26 August 1941), Trigger ( 2 2
October 1941), Wahoo (14 Fe b r u a r y
1942), Whale (14 March 1942), Sunﬁsh
(2 May 1942), Tunny (30 June 1942),
Tinosa (7 October 1942), Tullibee ( 1 1
November 1942)
B u i l d e r : Mare Island
Peto (30 April 1942), Pogy (23 June 1942),
Pompon (15 August 1942), Puffer ( 2 2
November 1942), Rasher (20 December
1942), Raton (24 January 1943), Ray (28
February 1943), Redfin (4 April 1943),
Robalo (9 May 1943), Rock (20 June
1943)
B u i l d e r : Manitowoc
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1526 tons (surfaced),
2410 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 311990 x 27930 x 15930
M a c h i n e r y : 4 diesel-electric power units,
2 electric motors, 2 shafts. 5400
bhp/2740 shp = 20.25/8.75 knots
R a n g e : 11,000 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 96
nm at 2 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 10 x 210 torpedo tubes (6 bow,
4 stern), total 24 torpedoes, 1 x 30 gun, 2
x 0.50 machine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 60
N o t e s : This class was the initial standard
war production version of the ﬂeet sub-
marine. The machinery space was divided
with a watertight bulkhead and the hulls
strengthened to increase diving depth to
300 feet from the prewar standard of 250
feet. During the course of World War II
their armament was modiﬁed to embark
4-inch or 5-inch deck guns, and 40mm
and 20mm antiaircraft weapons. The su-
perstructure was cut down to reduce the
silhouette on the surface, and search
radar was added.
The steamer Kano Maru rammed and
sank the G r u n i o n off Kiska on 30 July
1942; Japanese submarine chasers sank
the Amberjack off Rabaul on 16 February
1943; Japanese aircraft sank the Wa h o o
in La Perouse Strait on 11 October; the
D o r a d o was lost in transit to the Pa c i ﬁc
the same month; the submarine I - 1 7 6
torpedoed the C o r v i n a near Truk on 16
N o v e m b e r. The S c o r p i o n was mined in
the Yellow Sea in February 1944; the
Tullibee was sunk by one of its own torpe-
does in the Palaus on 26 March; the
S n o o k failed to return from a patrol off
Taiwan in April; shore batteries on Mat-
suwa Island sank the Herring on 1 June;
the Robalo was mined off Palawan Island
on 26 July; the F l i e r was mined in Bal-
abac Strait on 13 August; the escort No.
8 sank the Harder in Davol Bay on 24 Au-
gust; Japanese aircraft bombed the
Darter off Palawan Island on 24 October;
the Albacore was mined off Hokkaido on
7 November; the destroyer Shigure a n d
escorts C h i b u r i and No. 19 sank the
Growler off Mindoro the next day; a Japa-
nese escort sank the Scamp in Tokyo Bay
on 16 November. Japanese escorts sank
the Trigger in the East China Sea on 28
March 1945, and the escorts No. 63, No.
7 5, and No. 207 sank the B o n e f i s h i n
Toyama Wan on 18 June.
The G r o u p e r, the A n g l e r, the B l u e g i l l,
the B r e a m, the C a v a l l a, and the C r o a k e r
were converted to hunter-killer sub-
marines between 1951 and 1953 (two
engines being removed, a streamlined
sail and a snorkel ﬁtted, much upgraded
active and passive sonar systems added,
and extensive silencing and sound isola-
tion incorporated) and were stricken in
1968–1969. The Po m p o n, the R a s h e r,
the R a t o n, the R a y, the R e d f i n, and the
R o c k were converted to radar picket sub-
marines in 1951with large search radar
arrays and were stricken in the 1960s.
The Tu n n y was converted into a missile
submarine in 1953 to launch Regulus
missiles, became a transport submarine
in 1966, and was stricken in 1969.306 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED STAT E S

The Muskallunge and the Paddle were
transferred to Brazil as the Humaita and
the Riachvelo and discarded in 1968. The
Ja c k and the L a p o n were transferred to
Greece as the Amﬁtriti and the Poseidon
and were discarded in the mid-1970s.
The Trigger and the H a r d e r were trans-
ferred to Italy as the Livio Piomarta and
the Romeo Romei, and they were stricken
in the late 1980s. Italy also acquired the
B a r b and the D a c e (GUPPY IB conver-
sions) as the Enrico Ta z z o l i and the
Leonardo da Vi n c i , and they were dis-
carded in 1973. The M i n g o was trans-
ferred to Japan as the K u r o s h i o a n d
decommissioned in 1966. The remaining
vessels were stricken by 1960.

UNITED STATES: B A L A O CLASS (1942), PA M PA N I T O (1943)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Balao (27 October 1942), Billfish (12 No-
vember 1942), Bowfin (7 December
1942), Cabrilla (24 December 1942),
Cisco (24 December 1942), Capelin (20
January 1943), Crevalle (22 Fe b r u a r y
1943), Sand Lance (25 June 1943),
Picuda (12 July 1943), Pampanito ( 1 2
July 1943), Parche (24 July 1943), Bang
(30 August 1943), Pilotfish (30 A u g u s t
1943), Pintado (15 September 1943),
Pipeﬁsh (12 October 1943), Piranha (27
October 1943), Pomfret (27 October
1943), Sterlet (27 October 1943), Plaice
(15 November 1943), Queenﬁsh (30 No-
vember 1943), Razorback (27 January
1944), Redfish (27 January 1944), R o n-
quil (27 January 1944), Scabbardﬁsh (27
January 1944), Segundo (5 Fe b r u a r y
1944), Sea Devil (28 February 1944), At-
ule (6 March 1944), Sea Dog (28 MarchA WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED STAT E S 307

1944), Sea Fox (28 March 1944), Spike-
fish (26 April 1944), Sea Owl (7 May
1944), Sea Poacher (20 May 1944), S e a
Robin (25 May 1944), Sennet (6 June
1944), Piper (26 June 1944), T h r e a d f i n
(26 June 1944), Sea Cat (30 November
1944)
B u i l d e r : Portsmouth
Seahorse (9 January 1943), Skate (4 March
1943), Tang (17 August 1943), Ti l e f i s h
(25 October 1943), Spadeﬁsh (8 January
1944), Trepang (8 January 1944), S p o t
(19 May 1944), Springer (3 A u g u s t
1944), Stickleback (1 January 1945),
Tiru (16 September 1947)
B u i l d e r : Mare Island
Apogon (10 March 1943), Aspro (7 A p r i l
1943), Batfish (5 May 1943), A r c h e r f i s h
(28 May 1943), Burrﬁsh (18 June 1943),
Perch (12 September 1943), Shark ( 1 7
October 1943), Sealion (31 October
1943), Barbel (14 November 1943), Bar-
bero (12 December 1943), Baya (2 Janu-
ary 1944), Becuna (30 January 1944),
Besugo (27 February 1944), Blackﬁn (12
March 1944), Caiman (30 March 1944),
Blenny (9 April 1944), Blower (23 A p r i l
1944), Blueback (7 May 1944), Boarﬁsh
(21 May 1944), Charr (18 June 1944),
Chub (18 June 1944), Brill (25 June
1944), Bugara (2 July 1944), B u l l h e a d
(16 July 1944), Bumper (6 August 1944),
Cabezon (27 August 1944), Dentuda (10
September 1944), Capitaine (1 October
1944), Carbonero (15 October 1944),
Carp (12 November 1944), Catfish ( 1 9
November 1944), Bergall (12 December
1944), Entemedor (17 December 1944),
Chivo (14 January 1945), Chipper ( 4
February 1945), Clamagore (25 February
1945), Cobbler (1 April 1945), C o c h i n o
(20 April 1945), Corporal (10 June
1945), Cubera (17 June 1945), Cusk (28
July 1945), Diodon (10 September
1945), Dogfish (27 October 1945),
Greenﬁsh (21 December 1945), Halfbeak
(19 February 1946)
B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
Dragonet (18 April 1943), Escolar (18 April
1943), Devilﬁsh (30 May 1943), Hackle-
back (30 May 1943), Lancetﬁsh (15 Au-
gust 1943), Ling (15 August 1943), Lion-
fish (7 November 1943), Manta ( 7
November 1943), Moray (14 May 1944),
Roncador (14 May 1944), Sabalo (4 June
1944), Sableﬁsh (4 June 1944)
B u i l d e r : Cramp
Golet (1 August 1943), Guavina (29 August
1943), Guitarro (26 September 1943),
Hammerhead (24 October 1943), H a r d-
head (12 December 1943), Hawksbill (9
January 1944), Icefish (20 Fe b r u a r y
1944), Jallao (12 March 1944), Kete ( 9
April 1944), Kraken (30 April 1944), La-
garto (28 May 1944), Lamprey (18 June
1944), Lizardﬁsh (16 July 1944), Logger-
head (13 August 1944), Macabi (19 Sep-
tember 1944), Mapiro (9 November
1944), Menhaden (20 December 1944),
Mero (17 January 1945)
B u i l d e r : Manitowoc
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1525 tons (surfaced),
2415 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 311990 x 27930 x 15930
M a c h i n e r y : 4 diesel-electric power units,
2 electric motors, 2 shafts. 5400
bhp/2740 shp = 20.25/8.75 knots
R a n g e : 11,000 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 96
nm at 2 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 10 x 210 torpedo tubes (6 bow,
4 stern), total 24 torpedoes, 1 x 40 gun, 1
x 40mm AA gun, 2 x 0.50 machine guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 80
N o t e s : Careful attention to weight saving
allowed stronger construction in this
class, increasing diving depth to 400 feet.
The gunboat Karatsu and aircraft sank
the Cisco in the Sulu Sea on 28 Septem-
ber 1943, and the Capelin failed to re-
turn from a patrol in the Celebes Sea in308 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED STAT E S

D e c e m b e r. Japanese antisubmarine ves-
sels sank the G o l e t off Honshu on 14
June 1944; the E s c o l a r probably was
mined in the Yellow Sea on 17 October;
the destroyer Harukaze sank the Shark in
Luzon Strait on 24 October; the Ta n g
was sunk by one of its own torpedoes
near Turnabout Island on the same day.
Japanese aircraft sank the B a r b e l n e a r
Palawan Island on 4 February 1945; the
Kete failed to return from a patrol in Col-
nett Strait in March; the minelayer Hat-
s u t a k a sank the L a g a r t o in the Gulf of
Siam on 3 May; Japanese aircraft sank
the Bullhead off Bali on 6 August.
The Barbero was converted into a mis-
sile submarine in 1955 to launch Regu-
lus missiles. The B e c u n a, the B l a c k f i n,
the C a i m a n, the B l e n n y, the C h i v o, the
A t u l e, the Sea Po a c h e r, and the S e a
R o b i n received GUPPY IA conversions
(increased battery capacity, streamlined
topsides and sails, and snorkels, increas-
ing submerged speed to 15 knots). The
C a t f i s h, the E n t e m e d o r, the C l a m a g o r e,
the C o b b l e r, the C o c h i n o, the C o r p o r a l,
the Cubera, the Diodon, the Dogﬁsh, the
G r e e n f i s h, the H a l f b e a k, the H a r d h e a d,
the Jallao, the Menhaden, the Picuda, the
B a n g, the Po m f r e t, the R a z o r b a c k,
the Ronquil, the Sea Fox, the Threadﬁn,
the S t i c k l e b a c k, and the Ti r u r e c e i v e d
GUPPY IIA conversions (as GUPPY IA
with more advanced batteries increasing
submerged speed to 16 knots). The Cla-
m a g o r e, the C o b b l e r, the C o c h i n o, the
G r e e n f i s h, and the Ti r u later received
Guppy III conversions with 10-foot hull
sections inserted to provide space for
new ﬁre control systems. The Sabalo, the
S a b l e f i s h, the Ti l e f i s h, the B e r g a l l, the
Blower, the Brill, the Bumper, the Capi-
taine, the Carbonero, the Carp, the Cusk,
the Guitarro, the Hammerhead, the Ster-
l e t, the S c a b b a r d f i s h, the S e g u n d o, the
Sea Cat, the Sea Owl, the S e n n e t, and
the Piper received Fleet Snorkel conver-
sions (as GUPPY IA without the hull
streamlining). The Perch and the Sealion
became transport submarines and the
Burrﬁsh a radar picket.
The Ap o g o n, the P i l o t f i s h, and the
Skate were expended as targets at Bikini
Atoll on 1 July 1946; a battery explosion
sank the Cochino off Norway on 26 Au-
gust 1949; and the destroyer escort S i l-
v e r s t e i n accidentally rammed and sank
the S t i c k l e b a c k off Hawai’i on 29 May
1958.
The L a m p r e y and the M a c a b i w e r e
transferred to Argentina as the Santa Fe
and the Santiago del Estero and were bro-
ken up in 1971–1972. They were re-
placed by the C a t f i s h and the C h i v o,
which took their precursors9 names. Brit-
ish aircraft sank the Santa Fe on South
Georgia on 25 April 1982, and the Santi-
ago del Estero was discarded in 1983. The
D o g f i s h, the G r e e n f i s h, the Sand Lance,
and the Plaice were transferred to Brazil
as the Guanabara, the Amazonas, the Rio
Grande del Sul, and the B a h i a and dis-
carded between 1975 and 1983. The
Burrﬁsh was transferred to Canada as the
G r i l s e and stricken in 1969. The S p o t
and the S p r i n g e r were transferred to
Chile as the S i m p s o n and the T h o m s o n
and deleted in the late 1970s. The Scab-
b a r d f i s h and the H a r d h e a d were trans-
ferred to Greece as the Tr i a i n a and the
Pa p a n i k o l o s and stricken in the early
1990s. The B e s u g o, the C a p i t a i n e, and
the Lizardﬁsh were transferred to Italy as
the Francesco Morosini, the Alfredo Cap-
p e l l i n i, and the Evangelista To r i c e l l i a n d
discarded in the mid-1970s. The H a w k-
b i l l and the I c e f i s h were transferred
to The Netherlands as the Zeeleeuw and
the Wa l r u s and stricken in 1970–1971.
The A t u l e and the Sea Po a c h e r wereA WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED STAT E S 309

transferred to Peru as the Pacocha and La
Pedrera. The Pacocha was sunk in a colli-
sion in 1988, and La Pedrera was deleted
in 1995. The Ja l l a o, the K r a k e n, the
B a n g, and the R o n q u i l were transferred
to Spain as the Narciso Monturiol, the
Almirante Garcia de los Reyes, the Cosme
G a r c i a, and the Isaac Pe r a l and stricken
in the 1980s. Turkey acquired the B r i l l,
the B u m p e r, the H a m m e r h e a d, the
B l o w e r, the C h u b, the M e r o, the B l u e-
b a c k, the M a p i r o, the G u i t a r r o, the
B o a r f i s h, and the B e r g a l l as the B i r i n c i
I n ö n ü, the C a n a k k a l e, the C e r b e, the
Dumlupinar, the Gur, the Hizar Reis, the
Ikinci Inönü, the Piri Reis, the P r e v e z e,
the Sakarya, and the Turget Reis between
1948 and 1960 and discarded them in
the early 1970s. Turkey acquired the
Caiman, the Threadﬁn, the Sea Fox, the
R a z o r b a c k, the Po m f r e t , the E n t e m e d o r,
the C o b b l e r, and the C o r p o r a l in their
place as the Dumlupinar, the Birinci In-
önü, the Burak Reis, the Murat Reis, the
Oruc Reis, the P r e v e z e, the C a n a k k a l e,
and the Ikinci Inönü and retained them
into the 1990s. Venezuela acquired the
Tileﬁsh and the Cubera as the Carite and
the Tiburon, discarding them in the late
1970s.
The other members of the class be-
came training vessels in the 1960s and
were discarded in the 1970s.310 A WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED STAT E S

UNITED STAT E S :
T E N C H CLASS, A R G O N A U T (1944), AS A FLEET SNORKEL BOAT
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Tench (7 July 1944), Thornback (7 July
1944), Tigrone (20 July 1944), Ti g r a n t e
(9 August 1944), Trutta (18 A u g u s t
1944), Toro (23 August 1944), Torsk ( 6
September 1944), Quillback (1 October
1944), Argonaut (1 October 1944), Run-
ner (17 October 1944), Conger (17 Octo-
ber 1944), Cutlass (5 November 1944),
Diablo (1 December 1944), Requin ( 1
December 1944), Medregal (15 Decem-
ber 1944), Irex (26 January 1945), S e a
Leopard (2 March 1945), Odax (10 April
1945), Sirago (11 May 1945), Tr u m p e t-
fish (13 May 1945), Pomodon (12 June
1945), Remora (12 July 1945), Sarda (24
August 1945), Spinax (20 November
1945), Volador (17 January 1946)
B u i l d e r : Portsmouth
Amberjack (15 December 1944), G r a m p u s
(15 December 1944), Grenadier (15 De-
cember 1944), Pickerel (15 December
1944)
B u i l d e r : Boston
Trumpetfish (13 May 1945), Tusk (8 July
1945)
B u i l d e r : Cramp
Corsair (3 May 1946), Unicorn (1 A u g u s t
1946), Walrus (20 September 1946)
B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1570 tons (surfaced),
2415 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 311980 x 27930 x 15950
M a c h i n e r y : 4 diesel-electric power units,
2 electric motors, 2 shafts. 5400
bhp/2740 shp = 20.25/8.75 knotsA WAR-WINNING WEAPON?: UNITED STAT E S 311

R a n g e : 11,000 nm at 10 knots surfaced, 96
nm at 2 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 10 x 210 torpedo tubes (6 bow,
4 stern), total 24 torpedoes, 1 x 50 gun, 1
x 40mm AA gun, 1 x 20mm AA gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 80
N o t e s : These boats featured still stronger
construction, increasing the dive depth to
450 feet. The Unicorn and the Wa l r u s
were broken up incomplete and a further
17 boats were canceled.
The Te n c h and the Po m o d o n r e c e i v e d
GUPPY IA conversions; the T h o r n b a c k,
the Tirante, the Trutta, the Quillback, the
Tr u m p e t f i s h, the Tu s k, the C o n g e r, the
Sea Leopard, the O d a x, the S i r a g o,
the Pompodon, the Remora, the Volador,
the A m b e r j a c k, the G r a m p u s, the P i c k-
erel, and the Grenadier received GUPPY
IIA conversions; the Remora, the Volador,
and the P i c k e r e l received GUPPY III
conversions; and the Torsk, the Argonaut,
the R u n n e r, the D i a b o l o, the M e d r e g a l,
and the Irex received Fleet Snorkel con-
versions; while the Ti g r o n e, the R e q u i n,
and the Spinax became radar pickets.
Brazil acquired the Tr u m p e t f i s h, the
Sea Leopard, the O d a x, the A m b e r j a c k,
and the Grampus as the Goias, the Bahia,
the Rio de Janeiro, the Ceara, and the Rio
Grande do Sul and discarded them in the
1990s. The A r g o n a u t was transferred to
Canada as the R a i n b o w and stricken in
1974. Greece acquired the Remora as the
K a t s o n i s, discarding it in 1993. The
Volador and the Pickerel were transferred
to Italy as the Primo Longobardo and the
Gianfranco Gazzana Priaroggia, and they
were stricken in 1980–1981. Pakistan re-
ceived the D i a b o l o as the G h a z i. It was
sunk by the Indian destroyer Rajput near
Vishakapatnam on 4 February 1971. The
C u t l a s s and the Tu s k went to Taiwan as
the Hai Shih and the Hai Pao, and they
were discarded in the late 1990s. Turkey
acquired the Trutta and the Thornback as
the Cerbe and the Ulac Ali Reis and dis-
carded them in the late 1990s. Venezuela
acquired the Grenadier as the Picuda and
discarded it in 1990. The other members
of the class were stricken in the late
1960s and early 1970s.The Advent of
True Submarines

C H I N A
PROJECT 091 (N ATO HAN CLASS) (1970)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

401 (26 December 1970), 402 (1977), 403
(1983), 404 (1987), 405 (April 1990)
B u i l d e r : Huludao
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 4500 tons (surfaced),
5500 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 328900 x 36900 x 29900
M a c h i n e r y : 1 pressurized water reactor,
1 electric motor, 1 shaft. 15,000 shp =
12/25 knots
Endurance: 60 days
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 20 torpedoes or 36 mines
C o m p l e m e n t : 75
N o t e s : China’s ﬁrst nuclear-powered sub-
marines seem initially to have required
an extended period of trials and upgrades
to correct problems with their power
plants that persisted into the early 1990s.
The ﬁnal three boats were completed to a
modiﬁed design that lengthened the hull
some 25 feet abaft the sail and probably
upgraded torpedo weaponry and added
antiship missile launch capability. Recent
refits have enhanced these boats9 s o n a r
equipment and placed an anechoic tile
covering over their hulls.

313314 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: CHINA

PROJECT 035 (N ATO MING CLASS) (1971)

Unknown (July 1971), 232 ( N o v e m b e r
1 9 7 4 ) , 2 3 3 (1978), 3 4 2 , 3 5 2–3 5 4 ,
356–362 (1986–1995), 363 (May 1996),
305 (June 1997), 306 (September 1997),
3 0 7 (May 1998), 3 0 8 (October 1998),
309 (December 1999), 310 (June 2000)
4+ boats (2000–2002)
B u i l d e r : Wuhan
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1584 tons (surfaced),
2113 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 250900 x 25900 x 16990
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 5200 bhp/3500 shp =
15/18 knots
R a n g e : 8000 nm at 8 knots snorkeling,
330 nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 (prototypes: 6) x 533mm
torpedo tubes (6 bow, 2 stern), total 16
torpedoes or 32 mines
C o m p l e m e n t : 57
N o t e s : The first three boats of this class
functioned as development prototypes for
a Chinese upgrade of their copies of the
Soviet Project 633 submarines con-
structed earlier. The new design had
greater submerged speed and range
thanks to more powerful machinery, an
expanded battery, and improved hull
form. It also featured a more advanced
sensor outfit. The prototypes were fol-
lowed by an improved version that incor-
porated some hull contour modiﬁcations
and two stern torpedo tubes. The ﬁnal 10
boats were further upgraded with addi-
tional equipment installed in space cre-
ated by a 6960 longer hull.
Considerable uncertainty surrounds
the operational deployment of these
boats. Most of the ﬁrst production craft
seem to have served with the North Sea
Fleet, while later boats served in the
South China Sea Fleet. The prototypes
were retired from service in the early
1980s and have been scrapped. The 361
suffered a major accident while on the
surface in April–May 2003 that killed the
entire crew, but it was towed to port; a
second boat was involved in a major acci-
dent in May–June 2005.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: CHINA 315

PROJECT 039 (NATO SONG CLASS) (1994)

3 2 0 (25 May 1994), 3 2 1 (11 November
1999), 322 (28 June 2000), 314 (2003),
3 1 5 (3 June 2004), 3 1 6 (2004), 3 2 3
(2004), 318 (2005)
B u i l d e r : Wuhan
324 (2004), 325 (2004)
B u i l d e r : Jiangnan
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1700 tons (surfaced),
2250 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 251930 x 27960 x 17930
M a c h i n e r y : 4 MTU diesel engines, 2
generator sets, 2 electric motors, 1 shaft.
6092 shp = 15/22 knots
R a n g e : 8000 nm at 8 knots snorkeling, 72
nm at 2 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), torpedoes, antiship missiles, or
mines
C o m p l e m e n t : 60
N o t e s : The Project 039 design represents
a major advance in Chinese submarine
performance. It incorporates a teardrop
hull shape coated with anechoic tiles. The
raft-mounted German machinery drives a
seven-bladed skewed propeller, making
these boats as quiet as the U.S. Navy’s L o s
A n g e l e s class. These submarines are capa-
ble of ﬁring wire-guided torpedoes or an-
tiship missiles via their torpedo tubes.
The first boat (3 2 0) is the only Project
039; all later boats are to Project 039G
with improved sail contours and upgraded
bow-mounted sonar equipment. All boats
of this class serve with the East Sea Fleet,
and there apparently are plans to build up
to seven more of the type.

PROJECT 093 (2001)

2 boats
B u i l d e r : Huludao
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 6000 tons (surfaced),
8000 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 350900 x 36910 x 24970
M a c h i n e r y : 2 pressurized water reactors,
1 electric motor, 1 shaft. 20,000 shp = 30
knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow)
C o m p l e m e n t : 100
N o t e s : Reports indicate that this second-
generation nuclear-powered attack sub-
marine was developed with appreciable
Soviet assistance, especially for its power
plant and quieting. It features a seven-
bladed asymmetrical skewed propeller
and anechoic tile coating to reduce un-
derwater noise. At least one example was
launched in 2001 and began trials
in late 2002; a second boat has been
completed of a total of six to eight vessels
projected.316 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: DEMARK

PROJECT 039A (NATO YUAN CLASS) (2004)

330 (31 May 2004), u n k n o w n ( D e c e m b e r
2004)
B u i l d e r : Wuhan
N o t e s : Very little hard information on the
Yuan class is available, and its very exis-
tence came as a surprise to Western in-
telligence when photographs appeared in
2004. It has a teardrop hull with a raised
upper hump, anechoic tile coating to re-
duce underwater noise, an asymmetrical
seven-blade skewed propeller, and a tail
similar to that of the earlier Project 039
boats. It most likely is equipped with a
passive/active noise reduction system and
is capable of launching torpedoes and an-
tiship missiles through its tubes.

D E N M A R K
D E L F I N E N CLASS (1956)

Delﬁnen (4 May 1956), Spaekhuggeren (20
February 1957), Tu m l e r e n (22 May
1958), Springeren (26 April 1963)
B u i l d e r : Copenhagen
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 595 tons (surfaced), 643
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 1789100 x 15950 x 13900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Burmeister and Wa i n
diesel engines, 2 Brown-Boveri electric
motors, 2 shafts. 1200 bhp/2100 shp =
13.5/16 knots
R a n g e : 4000 nm at 8 knots snorkeling,
141 nm at 6 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 8 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 33
N o t e s : This class, designed by the Or-
logsværftet, was the last indigenous type
produced for the Danish fleet. It used
systems derived from study of the Ger-
man Type XXIII coastal boats and incor-
porated into a wholly local design. The
Tu m l e r e n was stricken in 1981, the
Delﬁnen in 1984, and the other boats in
1989.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: FRANCE 317

F R A N C E
N A R VAL CLASS (1954)

Narval (11 December 1954), Marsouin (21
May 1955), D a u p h i n (12 September
1955), Requin (3 December 1955)
B u i l d e r : Cherbourg
Espadon (15 September 1958)
B u i l d e r : Normand
Morse (10 December 1958)
B u i l d e r : Seine-Maritime
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1635 tons (surfaced),
1910 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 257900 x 26900 x 17900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Schneider diesel engines,
2 electric motors, 2 shafts. 4400
bhp/5000 shp = 16/18 knots
R a n g e : 15,000 nm at 8 knots snorkeling,
400 nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 550mm torpedo tubes (6
bow, 2 stern), total 14 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 63
N o t e s : These double-hull boats, designed
by Marie Clément Dupont de Dinechin,
incorporated French experience from op-
erating its two former German Type XXI
submarines. The class was modernized
between 1966 and 1970, receiving new
machinery (three 2500-bhp Pielstick
diesel engines and two 1500-shp electric
motors) and a revised sail with upgraded
sensors and ﬁre control equipment, and
landing the stern tubes. Displacement
fell slightly, and these boats also could
carry a mixed weapons load of 10 torpe-
does and 18 mines or 14 torpedoes only.
They were decommissioned between
1982 and 1986 and scrapped.

A R É T H U S E CLASS (1957)

Aréthuse (9 November 1957), Argonaute (26
June 1957), Amazone (3 April 1958), Ari-
ane (12 September 1958)
B u i l d e r : Cherbourg
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 543 tons (surfaced), 669
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 163900 x 19900 x 13900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 SEMT-Pielstick diesel en-
gines, 1 electric motor, 1 shaft. 1060
bhp/1300 shp = 12.5/16 knots
R a n g e : 4500 nm at 5 knots snorkeling,
350 nm at 3.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 550mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 8 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 39
N o t e s : These boats were designed as
small hunter-killer submarines, primarily
for service in the Mediterranean. They
were decommissioned between 1979 and
1982. The Argonaute became a museum
ship, and the other boats were scrapped.318 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: FRANCE

FRANCE: D A P H N É CLASS (1959), [SPA I N ] —D E L F I N ( 1 9 7 2 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Daphné (20 June 1959), Diane (4 October
1960), M i n e r v e (31 May 1961), [Po r t u-
g a l ] —A l b a c o r a (15 October 1966), B a r-
r a c u d a (24 April 1967), C a c h a l o t e ( 1 6
February 1968), D e l f i m (25 September
1968), [South A f r i c a ] —Maria van
R i e b e e c k (18 March 1969), Emily Hob-
h o u s e (24 October 1960), Johanna van
der Merwe (21 July 1970)
B u i l d e r : Dubigeon
D o r i s (14 May 1960), E u r y d i c e (19 June
1960), F l o r e (21 December 1960),
Galatée (22 September 1961), Junon (11
May 1964), Vénus (24 September 1964)
B u i l d e r : Cherbourg
P s y c h é (28 June 1969), S i r è n e (28 June
1969), [Pakistan]—Hangor (June 1969)
B u i l d e r : Brest
[ Pa k i s t a n ] —S h u s h u k (July 1969), M a n g r o
(February 1970)
B u i l d e r : La Ciotat
[ S p a i n ] —D e l f i n (25 March 1972), To n i n a
(3 October 1972), M a r s o p a (15 March
1974), Narval (14 December 1974)
B u i l d e r : Cartagena
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 869 tons (surfaced),
1043 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 190900 x 22900 x 17900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 SEMT-Pielstick diesel en-
gines, 1 electric motor, 2 shafts. 1300
bhp/1600 shp = 13.5/16 knots
R a n g e : 4500 nm at 5 knots snorkeling,
350 nm at 3.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 12 x 550mm torpedo tubes (8
bow, 4 stern), total 12 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 45THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: FRANCE 319

N o t e s : This class, designed by A n d r é
Gempp, was an enlarged version of the
previous hunter-killer type with substan-
tially enhanced sensors and a diving
depth of 1000 feet. They also proved very
successful in the export market until the
type suffered a series of accidents.
Diving accidents sank the M i n e r v e , t h e
E u r y d i c e , and the F l o r e on 28 January
1968, 4 March 1970, and 19 Fe b r u a r y
1971, probably as a result of problems
with their snorkels. The F l o r e was raised,
returned to service, and decommissioned
with the other French boats between
1987 and 1992 and scrapped.
The South African boats were re-
named the Spear, the Umkhonto, and the
A s s e g a a i in 1994. The S p e ar was
scrapped in 2002 and the other boats de-
commissioned in 2003. The Assegaai is to
become the centerpiece of a museum of
submarine technology at Capetown.
Portugal sold the C a c h a l o t e to Pa k-
istan in 1975 as the Ghazi. The Albacora
was stricken on 14 July 2000. The other
two boats still were in service in 2006.
The Pakistani boats received an up-
grade refit in the late 1980s and were
equipped to launch Sub-Harpoon mis-
siles. They will remain in service until the
delivery of the ﬁnal Agosta 90B boats.
The Spanish boats received a modern-
ization reﬁt in the late 1980s, acquiring a
new sonar outﬁt, ﬁre control system, and
noise suppression equipment. These
boats were decommissioned in 2003, the
Delﬁn becoming a museum ship.320 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: FRANCE

FRANCE: A G O S TA CLASS (1974), [PA K I S TA N ] —H A S H M AT (1977)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

A g o s t a (19 October 1974), B e v e z i e r s ( 1 4
June 1975), La Praya (15 May 1976),
Ouessant (23 October 1976)
B u i l d e r : Cherbourg
[Pakistan]—Hashmat (14 December 1977),
Hurmat (1 December 1978)
B u i l d e r : Dubigeon
[ S p a i n ] —G a l e r n a (5 December 1981),
Siroco (13 November 1982), Mistral (14
November 1983), Tr a m o n t a n a (30 No-
vember 1984)
B u i l d e r : Cartagena
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1490 tons (surfaced),
1740 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 222900 x 22900 x 18900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 SEMT-Pielstick diesel en-
gines, 1 electric motor, 1 shaft. 3600
bhp/4600 shp = 12/17.5 knots
R a n g e : 8500 nm at 9 knots snorkeling,
350 nm at 3.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 550mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 20 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 54
N o t e s : Jean Touffait oversaw the creation
of this new design for an oceanic hunter-
killer submarine with advanced sensors
and ﬁre control systems. They also were
successful in the export market. Tw o
boats ordered by South Africa were not
delivered because of the UN embargo on
arms sales to that nation and were pur-
chased by Pakistan.
The French boats were withdrawn
from service between 1997 and 2001 but
remain in the ﬂeet’s special reserve. The
O u e s s a n t was reactivated in 2003 as a
training vessel for Malaysian crews for
the S c o r p è n e type boats on order. The
Pakistani boats were fitted to launch
Sub-Harpoon missiles in 1984–1985 and
remain in service. The Spanish boats un-
derwent an upgrade refit that improved
their fire control system and sonar out-
ﬁts. They too remain operational.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: FRANCE 321

FRANCE: A M É T H Y S T E CLASS (1979), P E R L E (1990)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

R u b i s (7 July 1979), Saphir (1 September
1981), Casablanca (22 December 1984),
Améthyste (14 May 1985), Émeraude (12
April 1986), Perle (22 September 1990)
B u i l d e r : Cherbourg
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2410 tons (surfaced),
2680 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 237900 x 25900 x 23900
M a c h i n e r y : 1 CAS pressurized water re-
a c t o r, 2 turbo-alternator sets, 1 electric
motor, 1 shaft. 9500 shp = 25 knots sub-
merged
Endurance: 60 days
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 14 torpedoes or missiles, or
32 mines
C o m p l e m e n t : 66
N o t e s : Like the French ballistic missile
submarines, these boats are unusual in
using turbo-electric drive rather than
steam turbines. The Améthyste and the
Perle incorporated considerably improved
noise reduction measures compared with
the earlier boats, and all but the R u b i s
were brought up to the same standard be-
tween 1991 and 1995. These boats are
much noisier than their U.S. and British
counterparts and also have demonstrated
less mechanical reliability. The ﬁrst is not
expected to leave service until 2012, and
the last is scheduled to decommission
in 2022.322 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: FRANCE

[ PA K I S TA N ] —A G O S TA 90B CLASS, K H A L I D (1998)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

[ Pa k i s t a n ] —K h a l i d (8 August 1998), S a a d
(24 August 2002)
B u i l d e r : Cherbourg
[Pakistan]—Hamza (2005)
B u i l d e r : Karachi
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1570 tons (surfaced),
1760 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 2 2 2900 (H a m z a : 2 5 4960) x
22900 x 18900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 SEMT-Pielstick diesel en-
gines, 1 electric motor, 1 shaft. 3600
bhp/4600 shp = 12/17.5 knots. (H a m z a
also: MESMA air independent auxiliary
power system, 270 shp = 4 knots)
R a n g e : 7900 nm at 10 knots snorkeling,
178 nm at 3.5 knots submerged, 750 nm
at 3 knots (AIP)
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 550mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 20 torpedoes or Exocet mis-
siles
C o m p l e m e n t : 36
N o t e s : This class was developed from the
earlier A g o s t a type. It incorporates very
high tensile steel (equivalent to U.S.
HY100 steel) hull construction for
greater dive depth, extensive automation
to reduce crew size, integrated fire
control with an optronic periscope, an in-
ertial navigation system, very advanced
sensors, extensive noise suppression and
integral quieting, and the capability of
launching Exocet missiles while sub-
merged. The Hamza also incorporates the
modular MESMA air- i n d e p e n d e n t
propulsion system that burns diesel fuel
and oxygen to generate high-pressure
steam that drives a turbine. Using the
MESMA system it can operate sub-
merged for up to 18 days withoutsnorkel-
ing. The earlier units are to be back-ﬁtted
with MESMA modules in the future.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: FRANCE 323

[ S PA I N ] —S C O R P È N E CLASS (2003)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Type CM-2000
[Chile]—O’Higgins (November 2003),
[Malaysia]—1 boat
B u i l d e r : Cherbourg
[Chile]—Carerra (November 2004),
[Malaysia]—1+ boats
B u i l d e r : Cartagena
[India]—3 boats
B u i l d e r : Mazagon
Type AM-2000
[Spain]—4 boats
B u i l d e r : Cartagena and Cherbourg
[India]—3 boats
B u i l d e r : Mazagon
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1564 (AM-2000: 1670)
tons (surfaced), 1710 (AM-2000: 1815)
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 2179110 (AM-2000: 229980)
x 27970 x 18900324 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: FRANCE

M a c h i n e r y : 4 MTU diesel engines, 1
Jeumont-Schneider electric motor, 1
shaft. 4694 shp = 17/20 knots (AM-2000
also: MESMA air independent auxiliary
power system, 270 shp = 4 knots)
R a n g e : 6500 nm at 8 knots snorkeling,
550 nm at 4 knots submerged, 750 nm at
4 knots (AIP)
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 18 torpedoes or Exocet mis-
siles
C o m p l e m e n t : 31
N o t e s : This design was jointly developed
by France and Spain, with construction
shared between the two nations, the fore
section being built at Navantia and the
aft sections at DCN. It is optimized for
ultra-quiet operation through the use of a
streamlined hull form, suspended inter-
nal decks, extensive sound insulation of
machinery, and noise suppression equip-
ment. Operation is highly automated to
minimize crew size and extend opera-
tional autonomy. The AM-200 version
can operate submerged for up to 18 days
without snorkeling. The final three In-
dian boats will incorporate AIP.

B A R R A C U D A CLASS (2009)

6 boats
B u i l d e r : Cherbourg
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 3500 tons (surfaced),
4600 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 318900 x 299110 x 24900
M a c h i n e r y : 1 K15 pressurized water re-
a c t o r, 2 turbo-reductors, 2 electric mo-
tors, 1 pumpjet propulsor. 41,500 shp =
25+ knots submerged
Endurance: 70 days
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 18 torpedoes or Exocet mis-
siles, 12 vertical launch missile tubes, 12
Scalp missiles
C o m p l e m e n t : 60
N o t e s : Design work for these new boats
began in 1998; the ﬁrst order was placed
in 2003; and the ﬁrst hull was laid down
in 2005, with an anticipated trials date in
2011. The machinery arrangement is un-
usual, using electric motors for propul-
sion at cruising speeds and direct turbine
drive for maximum speed. Their dive
depth will be 1600 feet, and they will in-
corporate extensive passive and active
noise suppression measures.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: GERMANY 325

G E R M A N Y
TYPE 201 (1961)

U - 1 (21 October 1962), U - 2 (25 January
1962), U-3 (7 May 1962)
B u i l d e r : HWK
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 395 tons (surfaced), 433
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 142990 x 15900 x 13900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Mercedes-Benz diesel en-
gines, 1 electric motor, 1 shaft. 1200
bhp/1500 shp = 10/17.5 knots
R a n g e : 3800 nm at 8 knots snorkeling,
400 nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow)
C o m p l e m e n t : 21
N o t e s : The design for these boats, by the
Ingenieurkontor Lübeck (IKL), drew
heavily on the Type XXXIII coastal sub-
marines that were in production at the
end of World War II. Since it was antici-
pated that their principal area of opera-
tions would be the shallow waters of the
Baltic, hull and equipment were required
to have minimal magnetic signatures.
The nonmagnetic steel chosen for their
hull structures proved to have very little
resistance to corrosion, and they were
broken up in 1971.

TYPE 202 (1965)

Hans Te c h e l (15 March 1965), Fr i e d r i c h
Schurer (10 November 1965)
B u i l d e r : Atlas
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 100 tons (surfaced), 137
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 75990 x 11930 x 9900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Mercedes-Benz diesel en-
gines, 1 electric motor, 1 shaft. 330
bhp/243 shp = 6/13 knots
R a n g e : 3800 nm at 8 knots snorkeling,
400 nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow)
C o m p l e m e n t : 6
N o t e s : The IKL produce this design for a
small hunter-killer submarine at the
same time as the Type 201. The diesel
engine and the electric motor were
mounted in parallel, driving the same
gearbox. These boats suffered from the
same corrosion problems as the larger
submarines and proved too small to be
effective weapons. They were decommis-
sioned in 1966 and scrapped.326 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: GERMANY

TYPE 2 0 7 (1962), [NORWAY ] —U L A (1964)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

U - 4 (25 August 1962), U - 5 (20 November
1962), U - 6 (30 January 1963), U - 7 ( 1 0
April 1963), U-8 (19 June 1963), U-2 (15
July 1966), U-9 (20 October 1966), U-1
(17 February 1967), U-10 (5 June 1967),
U - 1 1 (9 February 1968), U - 1 2 (10 Sep-
tember 1968)
B u i l d e r : HWK
[Norway]—Kinn (30 November 1963), Kya
(20 February 1964), K o b b e n (26 A p r i l
1964), K u n n a (16 July 1964), U l a ( 1 9
December 1964), K a u r a (5 Fe b r u a r y
1965), U t s i r a (11 March 1965), U t s t e i n
(19 May 1965), U t v a e r (30 June 1965),
Uthaug (8 October 1965), S k l i n n a ( 2 1
January 1966), S k o l p e n (24 March
1966), S t a d t (10 June 1966), S t o r d ( 2
September 1966), Svenner (27 January
1967)
B u i l d e r : Nordseewerke
[ D e n m a r k ] —N a r h v a l e n (10 September
1968), N o r d k a p e r e n (18 December
1969)
B u i l d e r : Copenhagen
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 419 tons (surfaced), 455
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 1 4 3990– 1 5 0940 x 15900 x
13990
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Mercedes-Benz diesel en-
gines, 1 electric motor, 1 shaft. 1200
bhp/1500 shp = 10/17.5 knots
R a n g e : 3800 nm at 10 knots snorkeling,
200 nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow)
C o m p l e m e n t : 21
N o t e s : These boats were very slightly
modiﬁed versions of the earlier Type 201
class with upgraded sensors. To protect
against the corrosion problems of theTHE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: GERMANY 327

earlier boats, the first five vessels9 h u l l s
received a coating of special zinc paint;
the next four used a different, corrosion-
resistant steel; and the U-1 and U-2 were
new hulls built from magnetic steel in-
corporating all of the original machinery
and basic equipment of the original U-1
and U-2. The U-4 through the U-8 were
broken up between 1975 and 1977 and
the U - 1 and U - 2 in 1993. The U - 9 a n d
U-10 became museum ships in 1993; the
U-11 was modiﬁed as a target vessel that
same year and became a museum ship in
2003; and the U-12 became a sonar trials
b o a t in 1993 and was stricken in 2005.
The Danish boats had small changes to
suit local requirements and were decom-
missioned in 2003–2004.
The Norwegian boats were classed as
Type 207 and were built of magnetic
high-tensile steel to endow them with
deeper diving limits, and they had other
minor variations from the German boats.
The S t a d t was scrapped in 1989; the
K i n n was sunk as a target in 1990; the
U l a was renamed the K i n n in 1988 and
scrapped with the Utsira in 1998; the Ut-
s t e i n became a museum ship the same
year; the Sklinna was scrapped in 2001.
The U t h a u g , the U t v a e r, and the K y a
were transferred to Denmark between
1989 and 1991 as the Tumleren, the Sae-
l e n , and the S p r i n g e r e n , and Denmark
also received the K a u r a for spare parts.
They were decommissioned in 2004. The
Skolpen, the Stord, the Svenner, and the
K u n n a were transferred between 2002
and 2004 to Poland as the Sep, the Sokol,
the B i e l e k , and the K o n d o r, and Po l a n d
also received the Kobben for spare parts.
The Polish boats remain in service.328 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: GERMANY

G E R M A N Y: TYPE 206 CLASS, U - 2 9 (1971)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

U-13 (28 September 1971), U-15 (15 June
1972), U - 1 7 (10 October 1972), U - 1 9
(15 December 1972), U - 2 1 (9 March
1973), U - 2 5 (23 May 1973), U - 2 7 ( 2 1
August 1973), U-29 (5 November 1973)
B u i l d e r : HWK
U - 1 4 (1 February 1972), U - 1 6 (29 A u g u s t
1972), U - 1 8 (31 October 1972), U - 2 0
(16 January 1973), U - 2 2 (27 March
1973), U - 2 3 (22 May 1073), U - 2 4 ( 2 6
June 1973), U - 2 6 (20 November 1973),
U - 2 8 (22 January 1974), U - 3 0 ( 2 6
March 1974)
B u i l d e r : Nordseewerke
[ I s r a e l ] —G a l (2 December 1975), Ta n i n
(25 October 1976), Rahav (8 May 1977)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 456 tons (surfaced), 500
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 149960 x 15900 x 14900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Mercedes-Benz (Israeli
boats: MTU) diesel engines, 1 electric
m o t o r, 1 shaft. 1200 bhp/1500 shp =
10/17.5 knots
R a n g e : 4500 nm at 5 knots snorkeling,
200 nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 16 torpedoes, 24 mines
C o m p l e m e n t : 21
N o t e s : The Type 206 was designed by the
IKL as an improved Type 205 with a
large sonar dome in the bow, enhanced
m a n e u v e r a b i l i t y, quieter operations, and
the capability to launch wire-guidedTHE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: GERMANY 329

t o r p edoes. The mines are carried in two
external ﬁberglass containers.
The German boats were upgraded to
Type 206A between 1988 and 1992 with
updated sensors and improved crew ac-
commodations. The U-13, the U-14, the
U - 1 9 through the U - 2 1 , and the U - 2 7
were scrapped between 1996 and 1998,
and the U - 2 8 was decommissioned in
2004. The other boats remain in service
as of 2006.
The Israeli boats were built under
license in Britain for political reasons.
They were upgraded to operate Sub-
Harpoon missiles in 1983 and received
torpedo, ﬁre control, and sensor improve-
ments between 1987 and 1994. They
were decommissioned in 1999 and of-
fered for sale but remain unsold.

G E R M A N Y: TYPE 209 (1970) [INDIA]—S H I S H U M A R (1984) TYPE 209/1500
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Type 209/1100
[ G r e e c e ] —G l a v k o s (15 September 1970),
Nereus (7 June 1971), Triton (19 October
1971), Proteus (1 February 1972)
B u i l d e r : HWK
Type 209/1200
[ A r g e n t i n a ] —S a l t a (9 November 1972), S a n
L u i s (5 April 1973), [Pe r u ] —I s l a y (11 Octo-
ber 1973), A r i c a (5 April 1974), Casma ( 3 1
August 1979), A n t o f a g a s t a (19 December330 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: GERMANY

1979), P i s a g u a (19 October 1980),
C h i p a n a (19 May 1981), [Colombia]—
P i j a o (10 April 1974), Ta y r o n a (16 July
1974), [Tu r k e y ] —A t i l a y (23 October
1974), S a l d i r a y (14 February 1975),
B a t i r a y (26 October 1977), [South
K o r e a ] —Jang Bogo (18 June 1992),
[Portugal]—2 boats
B u i l d e r : HWK
[ Tu r k e y ] —Yi l d i r a y (20 July 1977), D o g o n a y
(16 November 1983), D o l u n a y (21 July
1988)
B u i l d e r : Golcük
[South Korea]—Lee Chun (12 October
1992), Choi Museon (7 August 1993),
Park Wi (21 May 1994), Lee Jongmu (17
May 1995), Jeong Un (5 May 1996), Lee
S h u n s i n (21 May 1998), Na Daeyong
(June 1999), Lee Eokgi (26 May 2000)
B u i l d e r : Daewoo
Type 209/1300
[ Ve n e z u e l a ] —S a b a l o (21 August 1975),
C a r i b e (16 December 1975), [Ecuador]—
S h y r i (8 October 1976), H u a n c a v i l v a ( 1 8
March 1977), [Indonesia]—C a k r a ( 1 0
September 1980), Nanggala (10 Septem-
ber 1980)
B u i l d e r : HWK
Type 209/1400
[ C h i l e ] —T h o m s o n (28 October 1982),
S i m p s on (29 July 1983), [Brazil]—Tu p i
(28 April 1987), [South Africa]—2 boats
B u i l d e r : HWK
[ B r a z i l ] —Ta m o i o (18 November 1993),
Ti m b i r a (5 January 1996), Ta p a j ó ( 1 1
June 1998), Tikuná (December 2005)
B u i l d e r : Rio de Janeiro
[ Tu r k e y ] —P r e v e z e (27 November 1993),
Sakarya (28 July 1994), 18 Mart (25 Au-
gust 1997), A n a f a r t a l a r (2 September
1998), Gür (25 July 2001), Ç a n a k k a l e
(July 2002)
B u i l d e r : Golcük
[Turkey]—Burakreis (2004), Inonü (2005)
B u i l d e r : Istanbul
[South Africa]—1 boat
B u i l d e r : Blohm und Voss
Type 209/1500
[ I n d i a ] —Shishumar (15 December 1984),
Shankush (11 May 1984)
B u i l d e r : HWK
[ I n d i a ] —S h a l k i (30 September 1989),
Shankul (21 March 1992)
B u i l d e r : Mazagon
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1100: 1106 tons (sur-
faced), 1207 tons (submerged), 1200:
1140 tons (surfaced), 1248 tons (sub-
merged), 1300: 1265 tons (surfaced),
1395 tons (submerged), 1400: 1285 tons
(surfaced), 1395 tons (submerged),
1500: 1660 tons (surfaced), 1850 tons
(submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 149960 x 15900 x 14900
M a c h i n e r y : 4 MTU diesel engines, 1
Siemens electric motor, 1 shaft. 1200
bhp/1500 shp = 10/17.5 knots
R a n g e : 8000 nm at 10 knots snorkeling,
400 nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 14 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 31
N o t e s : The Type 209 has been the most
successful export submarine design in
the West, yet none have served with the
German fleet. The design, by the IKL,
was based on features of earlier German
submarines and utilized well-proven
components. Its clean layout gave a
clear view from the torpedo room to the
machinery compartments, enhancing
operational control. Very high capacity
batteries endowed the type with long
range and high submerged speed. This
sophisticated design also proved very
flexible, able to grow, to accommodate
upgraded sensors and equipment, and
steadily to improve its quiet operation
c h a r a c t e r i s t i c s .
During the long production run of the
type, Howaldtswerke-Deutsche We r k eTHE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: GERMANY 331

developed a series of upgrade packages.
Many Type 209 boats were modified to
the standards of the German Type 206A
and also received Sub-Harpoon missile
capabilities. When the Type 212 ap-
peared, its improved performance and
quieting through the use of a slow-speed
permanent magnet electric motor driving
an advanced near-silent propeller and the
incorporation of air-independent propul-
sion through the insertion of a compart-
ment for fuel cells became upgrade op-
tions. The later Greek and the South
Korean boats are planned to receive air-
independent propulsion modules during
refits in the early 2000s, and the new
Portuguese boats will incorporate A I P
from the outset.

TYPE TR1700 (1982)

[ A r g e n t i n a ] —Santa Cruz (28 September
1982), San Juan (20 June 1983)
B u i l d e r : Nordseewerke
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2116 tons (surfaced),
2264 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 216960 x 24900 x 21940
M a c h i n e r y : 4 MTU diesel engines, 1
Siemens electric motor, 1 shaft. 6720
bhp/6600 shp = 15/25 knots
R a n g e : 12,000 nm at 8 knots snorkeling,
460 nm at 6 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 22 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 26
N o t e s : This class essentially was a sub-
stantially enlarged version of the Ty p e
209, primarily to endow it with greater
range for operations in the open waters
of the south Atlantic and Paciﬁc.

TYPE 210 (1988)

[ N o r w a y ] —U l a (28 July 1988), U r e d d ( 2 2
September 1989), U t v a e r (19 A p r i l
1990), Uthaug (18 October 1990), U t-
stein (25 April 1991), Utsira (21 Novem-
ber 1991)
B u i l d e r : Nordseewerke
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 940 tons (surfaced),
1150 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 193970 x 17990 x 15910
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MTU diesel engines, 1
Siemens electric motor, 1 shaft. 1700
bhp/1700 shp = 11/23 knots
R a n g e : 5000 nm at 8 knots snorkeling,
200 nm at 5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 14 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 19
N o t e s : This IKL design incorporated an
X-tail for enhanced maneuverability.
They had many problems with noisy ma-
chinery and weapons system malfunc-
tions initially. All boats remain in service.332 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: GERMANY

TYPE 800 (1996)

[ I s r a e l ] —D o l p h i n (15 April 1996),
Leviathan (27 May 1997), Tekuma (9 July
1998)
B u i l d e r : HWK and Nordseewerke
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1565 tons (surfaced),
1720 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 188900 x 25900 x 20940
M a c h i n e r y : 3 MTU diesel engines, 3
diesel generators sets, 2 Siemens electric
motors, 1 shaft. 5000 shp = 11/20 knots
R a n g e : 14,000 nm at 4 knots snorkeling,
420 nm at 8 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 650mm torpedo tubes, 6 x
533mm torpedo tubes (bow), total 16
torpedoes, antiship, or antihelicopter
missiles
C o m p l e m e n t : 30
N o t e s : These boats represent a very con-
siderable advance on the earlier Ty p e
209. The hull is constructed of nonmag-
netic high-tensile steel to increase diving
depth. They have an improved hull form
for better submerged performance, and
bow-mounted planes and an X-tail endow
them with enhanced maneuverability.
The German government funded con-
struction of the ﬁrst two boats and paid
half the cost of the third boat.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: GERMANY 333

G E R M A N Y: TYPE 2 1 2 A (2001), [ITA LY ] —S A LVAT O R E T O D A R O (2003)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

U - 3 1 (20 March 2002), U - 3 3 (30 A p r i l
2001)
B u i l d e r : HWK
U-32 (November 2003), U-34 (May 2005)
B u i l d e r : Nordseewerke
[ I t a l y ] —Salvatore To d a r o (6 November
2003), Sirce (April 2004) 2+ boats
B u i l d e r : Monfalcone
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1460 tons (surfaced),
1840 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 187960 x 23900 x 23900
M a c h i n e r y : 1 MTU diesel generator set,
9 Siemens PEM fuel cells for air-
independent cruising, 1 Siemens electric
motor, 1 shaft. 2400 shp = 12/20 knots
R a n g e : 8000 nm at 8 knots snorkeling,
420 nm at 8 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 22 torpedoes or 24 mines
C o m p l e m e n t : 27
N o t e s : The design for these boats was de-
veloped from the Type 800 and shares its
nonmagnetic high-tensile steel construc-
tion. The planes were moved to the
sail and, in conjunction with an X-tail,
endow them with enhanced submerged
m a n e u v e r a b i l i t y. They also are the first
production submarines to feature air-
independent propulsion using fuel cells,
and they introduced new slow-speed
permanent-magnet electric motors driv-
ing advanced near-silent propellers. Us-
ing fuel cells, these boats can operate
submerged continuously for up to three
weeks without snorkeling to recharge
their batteries. Accommodations are con-
siderably improved to suit them for long-
term submerged operation.334 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: GERMANY

G E R M A N Y: TYPE 214 CLASS (2004)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

[Greece]—Papanikolis (22 April 2004)
B u i l d e r : HWK
[ G r e e c e ] —Pipinos (1 September 2006),
Matrozos (2007), Katsonis (2007)
B u i l d e r : Hellenic
[South Korea]—Son Wo n - I l (2006), 2+
boats
B u i l d e r : Hyundai
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1700 tons (surfaced),
1860 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 213930 x 20980 x 20980
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MTU diesel generator sets,
2 Siemens PEM fuel cell air-independent
auxiliary propulsion units, 1 Siemens
electric motor, 1 shaft. 2400 shp = 12/20
knots
R a n g e : 12,000 nm at 8 knots snorkeling,
2400 nm at 4 knots submerged on fuel
cells
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 16 torpedoes or Sub-
Harpoon missiles
C o m p l e m e n t : 27
N o t e s : The Type 214 is an enlarged ver-
sion of the Type 212 with a modified
power plant and heavier armaments in-
tended for export customers.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: ITA LY 335

I TA LY
T O T I CLASS (1967)

Enrico Toti (12 March 1967), Attilio Bagno-
lini (26 August 1967), Enrico Dandolo
(16 December 1967), Lazzaro Mocenigo
(20 April 1968)
B u i l d e r : Monfalcone
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 535 tons (surfaced), 592
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 151980 x 15950 x 13910
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 1 electric
m o t o r, 1 shaft. 1080 bhp/900 shp =
8.5/13.5 knots
R a n g e : 3000 nm at 5 knots snorkeling,
180 nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 8 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 26
N o t e s : The gestation of the design for
these small hunter-killer submarines was
very prolonged, lasting for eight years be-
ginning in 1956. Initially they could carry
four wire-guided antisubmarine torpe-
does and four conventional antiship
weapons, but those were replaced by six
dual-purpose wire-guided torpedoes in
1972, when a passive ranging system was
ﬁtted. They were stricken between 1991
and 1993.336 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: ITA LY

I TA LY: S A U R O CLASS, NAZARRO SAURO (1976)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Nazarro Sauro (9 October 1976), Carlo Fe-
cia di Cossato (16 November 1977),
Leonardo da Vi n c i (20 October 1979),
Guglielmo Marconi (20 September 1980)
B u i l d e r : Monfalcone
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1455 tons (surfaced),
1640 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 209970 x 22950 x 18990
M a c h i n e r y : 3 diesel engines, 1 electric
m o t o r, 1 shaft. 3210 bhp/3650 shp =
12/20 knots
R a n g e : 2500 nm at 12 knots snorkeling,
250 nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 12 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 45
N o t e s : The design for these boats drew
considerably on contemporary German
submarine experience to create an effec-
tive hunter-killer type. They had an effec-
tive active and passive sonar array and
were armed with wire-guided torpedoes
controlled through a modern ﬁre control
system integrated with the sonar and a
passive ranging system. In the 1990s they
received a substantial reﬁt, upgrading ﬁre
control and sonar systems and incorpo-
rating substantial noise reduction. They
also were fitted to launch Sub-Harpoon
missiles, but Italy did not procure these
weapons. They were stricken between
2002 and 2005.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: ITA LY 337

P E L O S I CLASS (1986)

Salvatore Pe l o s i (29 November 1986), G i u-
liano Prini (12 December 1987)
B u i l d e r : Monfalcone
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1476 tons (surfaced),
1662 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 211920 x 22950 x 18970
M a c h i n e r y : 3 diesel engines, 1 electric
m o t o r, 1 shaft. 3210 bhp/3650 shp =
11/19 knots
R a n g e : 2500 nm at 12 knots snorkeling,
250 nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 12 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 50
N o t e s : These boats were slightly length-
ened versions of the previous class with a
single watertight bulkhead incorporated
into the pressure hull. They were
equipped to launch Sub-Harpoon mis-
siles from the outset, though Italy has yet
to procure that weapon. These boats
were modernized in the late 1990s with
improved integrated sensors and ﬁre con-
trol systems. They also received substan-
tial noise reduction through hull casing
improvements and an anechoic coating.338 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: ITA LY

I TA LY: L O N G O B A R D O CLASS (1992),
GIANFRANCO GAZZANA PRIAROGGIA (1993)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Primo Longobardo (20 June 1992), G i a n-
franco Gazzana Priaroggia (26 June
1993)
B u i l d e r : Monfalcone
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1653 tons (surfaced),
1829 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 217980 x 22950 x 19980
M a c h i n e r y : 3 diesel engines, 1 electric
m o t o r, 1 shaft. 3210 bhp/3650 shp =
11/19 knots
R a n g e : 5100 nm at 5 knots snorkeling,
240 nm at 4.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 12 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 50
N o t e s : These boats represent a further
improvement on the original S a u r o d e-
sign, with a longer hull of better hydrody-
namic form to reduce noise, increased
fuel supply, and an enlarged sail and cas-
ing. They were modernized in the late
1990s with an updated integrated com-
bat system, and the hull received an ane-
choic coating.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: JAPA N 339

J A PA N
O YA S H I O (25 MAY 1959)

B u i l d e r : Kawasaki
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1139 tons (surfaced),
1420 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 258960 x 229110 x 15900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 2700 bhp/5860 shp =
13/19 knots
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow)
C o m p l e m e n t : 65
N o t e s : J a p a n ’s first submarine design
since World War II was very conservative
and drew heavily on experience from ear-
lier wartime Japanese boats. The Oyashio
served as a training vessel from 1973 and
was discarded in 1976.

H AYA S H I O CLASS (1961)

Hayashio (31 July 1961), Natsushio (18 Sep-
tember 1962)
B u i l d e r : Mitsubishi
Wakashio (28 June 1961), Fuyushio (14 De-
cember 1962)
B u i l d e r : Kawasaki
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 650 tons (surfaced), 800
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 193960 x 21940 x 13960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 1350 bhp/1700 shp =
12/15 knots
A r m a m e n t : 3 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow)
C o m p l e m e n t : 43
N o t e s : The design for these boats drew on
U.S. experience with the small hunter-
killer submarines of the Barracuda class.
They were very maneuverable underwa-
ter and had good habitability, but their
small size was not suited to Paciﬁc condi-
tions. They were discarded in 1978–
1979.

O S H I O CLASS (1964)

Oshio (30 April 1964), Harushio (25 Febru-
ary 1967), Arashio (24 October 1968)
B u i l d e r : Mitsubishi
A s a s h i o (27 November 1965), M i c h i s h i o ( 5
December 1967)
B u i l d e r : Kawasaki
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1650 tons (surfaced),
2150 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 288980 x 269110 x 16900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Kawasaki-MAN diesel en-
gines, 2 electric motors, 2 shafts. 2300
bhp/6300 shp = 14/18 knots
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 210 torpedo tubes (6 bow,
2 stern)
C o m p l e m e n t : 80
N o t e s : These large boats drew on U.S. ex-
perience with the Tang class. They were
equipped to operate as antisubmarine
warfare targets. The stern tubes were set
up to launch swim-out torpedoes. These
boats were deleted between 1981 and
1986.340 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: JAPA N

J A PAN: U Z U S H I O CLASS (1970), N A R U S H I O ( 1 9 7 2 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

U z u s h i o (11 March 1970), I s o s h i o ( 1 8
March 1972), K u r o s h i o (22 Fe b r u a r y
1974), Yaeshio (19 May 1977)
B u i l d e r : Kawasaki
M a k i s h i o (27 January 1971), N a r u s h i o ( 2 2
November 1972), Ta k a s h i o (30 June
1975)
B u i l d e r : Mitsubishi
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1850 tons (surfaced),
2600 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 236930 x 32960 x 24970
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Kawasaki-MAN diesel en-
gines, 2 electric motors, 1 shaft. 3600
bhp/7200 shp = 12/20 knots
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes
(amidships)
C o m p l e m e n t : 80
N o t e s : The U z u s h i o class introduced a
teardrop double hull configuration. It
used high-tensile steel construction to in-
crease the diving depth and an automatic
three-dimensional steering system for
control at high submerged speeds. The
main sonar array was in a bow dome and
the torpedo tubes amidships. The first
two boats were deleted in 1987 and
1988. The other class members became
training vessels and were stricken be-
tween 1990 and 1996.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: JAPA N 341

Y U S H I O CLASS (1979)

Yushio (29 March 1979), Nadashio (27 Jan-
uary 1983), A k i s h i o (22 January 1985),
Yukishio (23 January 1987)
B u i l d e r : Mitsubishi
M o c h i s h i o (12 March 1980), S e t o s h i o ( 1 2
February 1981), Okishio (5 March 1982),
H a m a s h i o (1 January 1984), Ta k e s h i o ( 9
February 1986), S a c h i s h i o (17 Fe b r u a r y
1988)
B u i l d e r : Kawasaki
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2200 tons (surfaced),
2450 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 249940 x 32960 x 24970
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Kawasaki-MAN diesel en-
gines, 2 electric motors, 1 shaft. 3400
bhp/7200 shp = 13/20 knots
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (amid-
ships), total 20 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 80
N o t e s : These boats were improved ver-
sions of the previous class with upgraded
sensor systems and stronger hulls for
deeper diving. The final six boats were
equipped to launch Sub-Harpoon mis-
siles through their torpedo tubes. All be-
came training submarines between 1996
and 2006. Japan began discarding them
in 1999, with the ﬁnal boat scheduled to
be stricken in 2010.

H A R U S H I O CLASS (1989)

Harushio (26 July 1989), Hayashio (17 Janu-
ary 1991), Wa k a s h i o (22 January 1993),
Asashio (12 July 1995)
B u i l d e r : Mitsubishi
N a t s u s h i o (20 March 1990), A r a s h i o ( 1 7
March 1992), F u y u s h i o (22 January
1993)
B u i l d e r : Kawasaki
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2450 tons (surfaced),
2750 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 252970 x 329100 x 25940
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Kawasaki-MAN diesel en-
gines, 2 electric motors, 1 shaft. 5520
bhp/7200 shp = 12/20 knots
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (amid-
ships), total 20 torpedoes or missiles
C o m p l e m e n t : 75
N o t e s : These boats were still further im-
proved versions of the previous type, with
more advanced sensors, greater noise
quieting, and hulls built of NS110 high-
tensile steel, endowing them with a div-
ing depth in excess of 1,650 feet. They
were equipped to launch Sub-Harpoon
missiles from the outset.
The A s a s h i o was withdrawn from front-
line operations in 2000 and was length-
ened by 30 feet to accommodate an
a i r-independent propulsion system mod-
ule incorporating two 120-shp Stirling en-
gines, more highly automated engineering
control systems, and an anechoic cover-
ing for the hull. These modiﬁcations in-
creased displacement by 400 tons.342 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: JAPA N

O YA S H I O CLASS (1996)

O y a s h i o (15 October 1996), U z u s h i o ( 2 6
November 1998), I s o s h i o (27 November
2000), K u r o s h i o (23 October 2002),
Yaeshio (4 November 2004), SS-600 (Oc-
tober 2006)
B u i l d e r : Kawasaki
M i c h i s h i o (18 September 1997), M a k i s h i o
(22 September 1999), Narushio (4 Octo-
ber 2001), Ta k a s h i o (September 2003),
Setoshio (5 October 2005)
B u i l d e r : Mitsubishi
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2750 tons (surfaced),
3600 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 268900 x 33990 x 24930
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Kawasaki diesel engines, 2
electric motors, 1 shaft. 3400 bhp/7750
shp = 12/20 knots
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
20 torpedoes or missiles
C o m p l e m e n t : 69
N o t e s : This class adopted a new partial
double hull form to optimize the sensor
layout, which takes the form of two con-
formal arrays covering almost the full
length of each side of the hull and a chin
sonar dome. The hull also is optimized
for quiet operation and covered with an
anechoic layer except on the bottom. Fire
control, machinery, and submerged oper-
ations are highly automated. The final
boat of this class is scheduled to commis-
sion in March 2008.

2900-TON TYPE (2007)

SS-601 (October 2007)
B u i l d e r : Mitsubishi
SS-602 (October 2008)
B u i l d e r : Kawasaki
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2900 tons (surfaced),
4200 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 275970 x 359100 x 28900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Kawasaki diesel engines, 2
Stirling air-independent generator sets, 2
electric motors, 1 shaft. 3400 bhp/8000
shp = 13/20 knots
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
20 torpedoes or missiles
C o m p l e m e n t : 65
N o t e s : Modified versions of the O y a s h i o
class incorporating a Stirling engine air-
independent propulsion system as tested
in the Asashio.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: THE NETHERLANDS 343

THE NETHERLANDS
D O L F I J N CLASS (1959)

Dolﬁjn (20 May 1959), Zeehond (20 Febru-
ary 1960)
B u i l d e r : Rotterdamse
Po t v i s (12 January 1965), To n i j n (14 June
1965)
B u i l d e r : Fijenoord
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1494 tons (surfaced),
1826 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 262900 x 26900 x 14900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 MAN diesel engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 2800 bhp/4200
shp = 14.5/17 knots
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
bow, 4 stern), total 16 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 67
N o t e s : The unusual three-cylinder pres-
sure hull design for these boats evolved
from studies undertaken during Wo r l d
War II by the Nederlandsche Ve r e n i g d e
Scheepsbouw Bureaux for multicylinder
submarines. The full-length upper
c y l i n d e r housed crew, command and
control, and weapons spaces, while the
two shorter parallel, lower cylinders ac-
commodated independent machinery
modules (each comprising a diesel en-
gine and an electric motor driving a sin-
gle shaft, plus a 168-cell battery). A
streamlined outer casing enclosed the
entire structure. Construction of the
second pair of boats was delayed to ex-
plore ultimately abortive nuclear power
o p t i o n s .
All boats received upgraded sensor
outﬁts in the 1970s, and the later pair re-
ceived more powerful Pielstick diesel
engines in the late 1980s. The Dolﬁjn de-
commissioned in 1982; the Z e e h o n d b e-
came a test hulk in 1990 and was
scrapped in 1997; and the ﬁnal pair de-
commissioned in 1992, the To n i j n b e-
coming a museum vessel in 1994.344 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: SOVIET UNION

SOVIET UNION
PROJECT 613 [NATO WHISKEY] (1951)

S - 8 0 (1951), S - 4 3–S - 4 6 (1952), S - 1 4 0–S -
152 (1953), S-155 (1953), S-157–S-158
(1953), S - 1 5 9–S - 1 8 6 (1954), S - 1 9 2
(1954), S - 1 9 3 –S - 2 0 0 (1955), S - 2 6 1–S -
289 (1955), S-290–S-297 (1956), S-300
(1956), S - 3 2 5–S - 3 2 9 (1956), S - 3 3 8–S -
349 (1956)
B u i l d e r : Gorkiy
S - 6 1–S - 6 5 (1952), S - 6 6–S - 7 6 (1953), S -
7 7–S - 8 0 (1954), S - 8 6–S - 9 1 (1954), S -
9 5–S - 9 7 (1954), S - 1 0 0 (1954), S - 2 1 7
(1954), S - 9 8 (1955), S - 2 1 8–S - 2 3 4
(1955), S - 2 3 5–S - 2 4 6 (1956), S - 2 5 0
(1956), S - 3 7 4 (1956), S - 3 7 6 (1956), S -
375 (1957), S-277–S-384 (1957)
B u i l d e r : Nikolayev
S - 1 5 3–S - 1 5 4 (1953), S - 1 5 6 (1953), S -
187–S-191 (1955), S-355–S-357 (1955),
S - 3 5 8–S - 3 6 1 (1956), S - 3 6 2–S - 3 6 4
(1957), S-365 (1958)
B u i l d e r : Baltic
S - 3 3 1 (1954), S - 3 3 2–S - 3 3 5 (1955), S -
336–S-337 (1956), S-390–S-391 (1956),
S-392–S-393 (1957)
B u i l d e r : Komsomolsk
[ C h i n a ] —1 1 9 – 1 2 0 , 1 2 2 – 1 2 3 , 1 2 7 , 1 2 9 ,
1 3 1 , 2 0 1–2 0 7 , 2 2 1 , 2 4 1 , 2 4 3 – 2 4 4 ,
265–267 (1956–1964)
B u i l d e r : Guangdong and Shanghai
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1055 tons (surfaced),
1350 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 249920 x 20980 x 15910
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 4000 bhp/2700 shp =
18.25/13 knots
R a n g e : 22,000 nm at 9 knots surfaced,
443 nm at 2 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
b o w, 2 stern), total 12 torpedoes, 2 x
57mm guns, 2 x 25mm guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 52
N o t e s : Design work on this class began
immediately after World War II as a
medium submarine to replace the earlier
S and Shch types. Detailed examination
of German Type XXI boats strongly inﬂu-
enced the final design, which incorpo-
rated, in a less pronounced form, the
figure-eight midsection and distinctive
stern contours of these boats. There
were many detail variations between dif-
ferent series of these submarines, mainly
in the exact number and disposition of
the guns.
Large numbers of these boats were
modified for special missions or experi-
ments. Many also went to fleets within
the Soviet sphere of influence: 5 to
China (in addition to the 21 assembled
there from Soviet-supplied components),
8 to Egypt, 2 to Bulgaria, 14 to Indone-
sia, 4 to Albania, 5 to Poland, 4 to North
Korea, and one each to Cuba and Syria.
By the early 1980s about 60 boats of the
215 built in the Soviet Union remained
in service, and 18 still existed 10 years
later.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: SOVIET UNION 345

SOVIET UNION: PROJECT 611 [NATO ZULU] (1953)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

B-61–B-62 (1953), B-63–B-67 (1954), B-68
(1955)
B u i l d e r : Sudomekh
B - 6 9–B - 7 0 (1955), B - 7 1–B - 7 2 (1956),
B - 7 4–B - 7 7 (1956), B - 8 0–B - 8 2 ( 1 9 5 7 ) ,
B-88 (1957), B-90 (1957), B-91 (1958)
B u i l d e r : Severodvinsk
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1830 tons (surfaced),
2600 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 2 9 691 00 x 24970 x 16950
M a c h i n e r y : 3 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 3 shafts. 6000 bhp/2700 shp =
17/15 knots
R a n g e : 22,000 nm at 9 knots surfaced,
443 nm at 2 knots submerged, 9500 nm
at 8 knots snorkeling
A r m a m e n t : 10 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(6 bow, 4 stern), total 22 torpedoes, 2 x
57mm guns, 1 x 25mm gun
C o m p l e m e n t : 72
N o t e s : Design work on this class began
immediately after World War II as a long-
range submarine to replace the earlier K
type. It featured greatly increased battery
capacity and stronger hull construction
to make possible deeper diving. The gun
armament eventually was removed from
all boats, and they were reconﬁgured with
snorkels and larger sails.
Three to four boats were converted for
oceanographic research, and others were
adapted to experimental projects. A l l
went out of service during the 1980s.346 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: SOVIET UNION

PROJECT 615 [NATO QUEBEC] (1953)

M - 2 5 4 (1953), M - 2 5 5–M - 2 5 9 (1955), M -
2 6 0–M - 2 6 8 (1956), M - 3 5 1–M - 3 5 4
(1956), M - 2 6 9 (1957), M - 2 9 5 ( 1 9 5 7 ) ,
M - 2 9 7–M - 3 0 0 (1957), M - 3 5 5–M - 3 5 6
(1957), M - 3 0 1 (1958), M - 3 2 1 ( 1 9 5 8 ) ,
M-354 (1958)
B u i l d e r : Sudomekh
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 460 tons (surfaced), 540
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 286930 x 14990 x 119100
M a c h i n e r y : 1 diesel engine, 2 electric
motors, 3 shafts. 3000 bhp/4400 shp =
18/16 knots
R a n g e : 3150 nm at 8.25 knots surfaced,
410 nm at 3.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 8 torpedoes, 2 x 25mm guns
C o m p l e m e n t : 33
N o t e s : These boats were designed for ser-
vice in the Baltic and Black seas as re-
placements for the wartime M type. The
first few units received the Kreislauf
closed-cycle oxygen-fueled diesel propul-
sion system, but that was not successful;
it was replaced by a conventional diesel
engine. The guns were removed in the
late 1950s, and all the boats were stricken
by the late 1960s.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: SOVIET UNION 347

SOVIET UNION: PROJECT 627 [NATO NOVEMBER] (1957)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

K-3 Leninskiy Komsomolets (1 July 1958),
K - 1 4 (31 December 1959), K - 5 (17 A u-
gust 1960), K-8 (31 August 1960), K-115
(30 December 1960), K - 1 1 (23 Decem-
ber 1961), K-21 (23 December 1961), K-
133 (16 October 1962), K-181 (16 Octo-
ber 1962), K-42 Rostovskiy Komsomolets
(4 November 1963), K-159 (4 November
1963), K - 5 0 (20 December 1963), K - 5 2
(23 December 1963)
B u i l d e r : Severodvinsk
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 3087 tons (surfaced),
3986 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 352930 x 26910 x 21900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 VM-A pressurized water
reactors, 2 steam turbines, 2 shafts.
35,000 shp = 15.5/30 knots
Endurance: 60 days
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 20 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 110
N o t e s : The ﬁrst boat (the K - 3) was built
to Project 627, and its successors to Pro-
ject 627A. The double-hull design was
characterized by its torpedolike form and
streamlined sail. Initially it was to be
armed with a single T-15 torpedo with a
thermonuclear warhead but was re-
designed for conventional torpedo tubes.
The hull interior was lined to reduce
noise emissions, and its exterior received
an anechoic coating; nevertheless, these
submarines still were noisier than con-
temporary U.S. boats. They carried two
large sonars in the bow, one passive and
the other capable of operating in either
active or passive modes. Their test depth
was 975 feet.
The Soviet power plant operated at
higher temperatures and was more pow-
erful than contemporary U.S. systems.
This class nevertheless suffered from
substantial machinery problems, often a
consequence of inadequate quality con-
trol in production. At least three of the
class suffered reactor accidents in the
early 1960s.
A fire broke out on the K - 8 while it
was submerged off the Spanish coast on
8 April 1970. It surfaced but sank four
days later with half of its crew. The other
class members were stricken between
1989 and 1992. The K-3 is preserved as a
memorial on the Kola Peninsula.348 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: SOVIET UNION

SOVIET UNION: PROJECT 633 [NATO ROMEO] (1958)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

S - 4 (1958), S - 6 (1958), S - 7 (1958) S - 1 1
(1959), S - 2 8 (1959), S - 3 4 (1959), S -
3 6–S - 3 8 (1960), S - 4 1 (1960), S - 4 9
(1960), S-53 (1961), S-57 (1961), S-101
(1961), S - 1 2 3 (1961), S - 2 1 2 (1961), S -
323 (1961), S-350–S-352 (1961), S-354
(1962)
B u i l d e r : Gorkiy
[ C h i n a ] —1 2 6 , 1 4 0 , 1 4 2 – 1 4 3 , 1 5 3 , 1 7 2 ,
176, 208–218, 227–229, 237–239, 245,
249, 254, 260, 267–272, 275–283, 286,
287, 291–304, 343–350, 355 ( 1 9 6 5 –
1984)
B u i l d e r : Wuhan, Guangdong, Jiangnan,
and Huludao
[North Korea]—12 to 15 boats (1976–1992)
B u i l d e r : Bong Dao Bo and Mayang Do
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1330 tons (surfaced),
1730 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 251930 x 21940 x 15910
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 2000 bhp/2700 shp =
15.5/13 knots
R a n g e : 9000 nm at 9 knots snorkeling,
350 nm at 2 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 533mm torpedo tubes (6
bow, 2 stern), total 14 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 52
N o t e s : This class was developed to re-
place the earlier Project 613 boats and
were the ﬁrst Soviet type completed with-
out any gun armament. They could dive
appreciably deeper than their precursors
and were equipped with considerably
more advanced sonar systems.
Large numbers of these boats were
transferred to other ﬂeets: 6 to Egypt, 2
to Bulgaria, 2 to Algeria, and 2 to Syria.
Of the 35 boats built in China, 7 were
transferred to North Korea (in addition
to the 12 to 15 built there) and 4 to
Egypt.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: SOVIET UNION 349

SOVIET UNION: PROJECT 641 [NATO FOXTROT] (1958)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

B-94 (1958), B-37, B-95, B-133, B-135
(1959), B-57, B-85, B-116, B-130, B-
139, B-143 (1960), B-4 Chalyabinskiy
Komsomolets, B-7, B-33, B-59, B-153,
B-156, B-164 (1961), B-8, B-38, B-50,
B-53, B-105, B-169 (1962), B-2,
B-31, B-55 (1963), B-6, B-15, B-98, B-
101, B-103 (1964), B-9, B-21, B-25, B-
107, B-109, B-112 (1965), B-26
Yaroslavskiy Komsomolets, B-28–B-29,
B-34, B-40–B-41 (1966), B-39, B-46,
B-49 Vladimirskiy Komsomolets, B-397
(1967), B-400, B-413 (1968), B-205,
B-416 (1969), B-213, B-435, B-440
(1970), B-409, B-427 (1971) [ I n d i a ] —
K u r s u r a (1968), K a r a n j, K a n d h e r a
(1969), Kalvari (1970), Ve l a, Va g i r
(1973), Va g l i (1974), Va g s h e e r ( 1 9 7 5 ) ,
[ L i b y a ] —Al Badr, Al Fa t a h, Al A h a d
(1978), Al Matrega (1981), Al Khyber
(1982), Al Hunyan (1983), [Cuba]—
725 (1979), 7 2 7 (1980), 7 2 9 ( 1 9 8 4 )
B u i l d e r : Sudomekh
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1957 tons (surfaced),
2475 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 299960 x 24970 x 16990
M a c h i n e r y : 3 diesel engines, 1 electric
m o t o r, 3 shafts. 6000 bhp/8100 shp =
16.75/16 knots
R a n g e : 17,900 nm at 8 knots snorkeling,
400 nm at 2 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 10 x 533mm torpedo tubes (6
bow, 4 stern), total 22 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 70350 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: SOVIET UNION

N o t e s : This class of long-range sub-
marines was developed to replace the
earlier Project 611 type. Like the Project
633 type, they were equipped with a sub-
stantially more advanced sonar outﬁt and
could dive deeper than their precursors.
In addition to the 17 boats built for ex-
port, 2 submarines were transferred to
Poland in 1987 and 1988 as the Wilk and
the D z i k . All the boats, both Soviet and
foreign, were discarded in the 1990s.

PROJECT 651 [NATO JULIETT] (1962)

K - 1 5 6 (31 July 1962), K - 7 0 , K - 8 5 ( 1 9 6 3 ) ,
K - 8 1 (7 August 1964), K - 6 8 , K - 7 7
(1964), K-24 (11 March 1965), K-58, K-
6 3 , K - 7 3 (1965), K - 6 7 , K - 7 8 , K - 2 0 3
(1966), K-120, K-304, K-318 (1967)
B u i l d e r : Gorkiy
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 3140 tons (surfaced),
4240 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 281990 x 319100 x 22980
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 7000 bhp/5000 shp =
16/14 knots
R a n g e : 9000 nm at 7 knots snorkeling,
810 nm at 2.75 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x P-6 antiship missiles, 6 x
533mm torpedo tubes (bow), 4 x 400mm
torpedo tubes (stern), total 6 plus 12 tor-
pedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 78
N o t e s : This class was designed for anti-
ship missile attack against NATO surface
warships, especially carrier groups. They
proved very reliable and tough but were
not optimized for either surface or sub-
merged operation; also, they were too
noisy for their primary mission. All were
discarded between 1989 and 1994.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: SOVIET UNION 351

SOVIET UNION: PROJECT 675 [NATO ECHO II] (1962)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

K-1, K-22 Krasnovardeets, K-28, K-35, K-47,
K - 5 6 , K - 7 4 , K - 8 6 , K - 1 0 4 , K - 1 2 5 , K - 1 6 6
(1962–1968)
B u i l d e r : Severodvinsk
K-7, K-10, K-23, K-31, K-34 Kefal, K-48, K-
57, K-90, K-94, K-108, K-116, K-128, K-
1 3 5 , K - 1 7 2 , K - 1 7 5 , K - 1 8 4 , K - 1 8 9
(1962–1968)
B u i l d e r : Komsomolsk
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 4415 tons (surfaced),
5737 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 376960 x 30960 x 23900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 VM-A pressurized water
reactors, 2 geared steam turbines, 2
shafts. 35,000 shp = 14/22.75 knots
Endurance: 70 days
A r m a m e n t : 8 x P-6 antiship missiles,
4 x 533mm torpedo tubes (bow), 2 x
400mm torpedo tubes (stern), total 10
plus 6 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 109
N o t e s : These boats were an enlargement
of the Project 659 (NATO Echo I) de-
sign, with an additional pair of missile-
launching tubes and an enlarged sail to
accommodate the guidance radar for P-6
antiship missiles. Their primary mission
was attacks against U.S. Navy carrier task
forces, though they had a secondary land
attack role.
Like other early Soviet nuclear sub-
marines, boats of this class suffered from
power plant accidents and breakdowns.
The K - 1 1 6 , the K - 3 1 (by then redesig-
nated the K-431), and the K-192 all expe-
rienced serious reactor accidents (explo-
sions or melt-downs), leading to their
removal from service in 1978, 1986, and
1989, respectively. The whole class was
decommissioned by the mid-1990s.352 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: SOVIET UNION

PROJECT 645 ZHMT (NATO NOVEMBER) (1963)

K-27 (30 October 1963)
B u i l d e r : Severodvinsk
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 3414 tons (surfaced),
5078 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 360930 x 27930 x 19920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 VT liquid lead-bismuth re-
actors, 2 geared steam turbines, 2 shafts.
35,000 shp = 15/29 knots
Endurance: 60 days
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 20 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 105
N o t e s : The K - 2 7 used the Project 627A
design lengthened to accommodate liq-
uid lead-bismuth reactors, which offered
the potential for higher power outputs as
a result of more efficient heat transfer,
although their operation was complicated
by the need to keep the alloy liquid, ei-
ther by running the reactors continuously
or by providing an external heat supply
while in port. The K - 2 7 also was con-
structed of low-magnetic steel to reduce
its vulnerability to mines, had an auto-
mated torpedo reloading system, and a
self-sustaining turbo-generator. After ini-
tially successful trials, major repairs to ﬁx
hull cracks were necessary. When the K-
27 returned to service, a series of major
machinery problems culminated in a ra-
dioactive gas explosion on 24 May 1968
while the submarine was underwater. Re-
quired repairs were so extensive that the
K-27 was stricken and scuttled in 1981.

PROJECT 671 [NATO VICTOR I] (1965)

K-37 (October 1965), K-69, K-147 (1967),
K-53, K-306 (1968), K-53 50 Let SSSR,
K - 3 7 0 (1969), K - 3 6 7 , K - 4 3 8 (1970), K -
3 1 4 , K - 3 9 8 (1971), K - 4 5 4 , K - 4 6 2 , K -
469, K-481 (1972)
B u i l d e r : Admiralty
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 3650 tons (surfaced),
4830 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 305900 x 34990 x 23970
M a c h i n e r y : 2 VM-5P pressurized water
reactors, 1 geared steam turbine, 1 shaft.
31,000 shp = 12/33 knots
Endurance: 50 days
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 18 torpedoes or 36 mines
C o m p l e m e n t : 76
N o t e s : The use of a body-of-revolution
hull form in this design permitted the in-
stallation of the two reactors side-by-side
and the turbine and two turbo-reactors in
a single compartment, reducing overall
length and, therefore, wetted area. As a
result the Project 6711 boats were 10
percent faster than their Project 627A
precursors. The designers made a major
effort to reduce noise generation through
the use of a dampening coating inter-
n a l l y, an external anechoic layer, and
spring-loaded covers for limber holes.
Higher tensile steel construction en-
dowed the type with a test depth of 1300
feet. The large Rubin sonar system was
installed in the bow hemisphere, with the
torpedo tubes arranged above it. At least
three boats (the K - 3 1 4 , the K - 4 5 4 , a n d
the K - 4 6 9) were upgraded to launch
TEST-68 wire-guided torpedoes. All boats
were taken out of service between 1989
and 1996.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: SOVIET UNION 353

SOVIET UNION: PROJECT 670A [NATO CHARLIE I] (1967)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

K-43 (1967), K-25, K-87, K-121 (1968), K-
308, K-313 (1969), K-303, K-320, K-325
(1970), K-201, K-429 (1971)
B u i l d e r : Gorkiy
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 3580 tons (surfaced),
4550 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 309940 x 32960 x 24970
M a c h i n e r y : 1 VM-4 pressurized water re-
actors, 1 geared steam turbine, 1 shaft.
18,800 shp = 16/26 knots
Endurance: 50 days
A r m a m e n t : 8 x P-70 antiship missiles, 4 x
533mm torpedo tubes, 2 x 400mm tor-
pedo tubes (all bow), total 12 plus 4 tor-
pedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 90
N o t e s : Project 670 was developed speciﬁ-
cally to attack U.S. Navy carrier groups.
It used a streamlined double hull similar
to that of the Project 671 but with a large
domed bow to accommodate torpedo
tubes and the large Kerch–670 sonar,
used to track its targets. Four angled
missile-launching tubes on each side
flanked the torpedo compartment be-
tween the inner and outer hulls. The
power plant was one-half of the installa-
tion used in Project 671. These sub-
marines had a test depth of 1150 feet.
The K-429 sank in the Bering Sea on
23 June 1983, was recovered, only to sink
again while repairing on 13 September
1985. The K-313 suffered a reactor melt-
down in December 1985 but returned to
service. The K-43 was leased to India for
three years from January 1988, serving as
the C h a k r i . All surviving boats of the
class were discarded by 1994.354 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: SOVIET UNION

PROJECT 661 [NATO PA PA] (1968)

K-162 (21 December 1968)
B u i l d e r : Severodvinsk
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 5280 tons (surfaced),
6320 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 350980 x 37990 x 26930
M a c h i n e r y : 2 VM-5 pressurized water
reactors, 2 geared steam turbines, 2
shafts. 80,000 shp = 16/42 knots
Endurance: 50 days
A r m a m e n t : 10 x P-120 antiship missiles,
4 x 533mm torpedo tubes (bow), total 12
torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 75
N o t e s : Designed as a prototype for series
construction, the Project 661 boat re-
mained a unique example and served
primarily as a test bed for advanced sub-
marine features. Titanium was used for
constructing the double hull; there was a
very small sail, and a large bow sonar
dome. This boat was among the fastest
submarines built, attaining 44.75 knots
during a series of experimental patrols in
1971, but it was too expensive, noisy, and
unreliable for series production. It was
withdrawn from service in 1988.

SOVIET UNION: PROJECT 641BUKI [NATO TANGO] (1972)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

B-380 Gorvovskiy Komsomolets (1972), B -
3 0 (1972), B - 9 7, B - 1 4 6 (1974), B - 2 1 5,
B - 2 2 5 (1975), B - 2 9 0 (1976), B - 3 0 3, B -
3 0 7 (1977), B - 3 1 2, B - 3 1 9, B - 3 8 6
(1978), B-443, B-474 (1979), B-498, B-
504, B-515 (1980), B-519, B-546 (1981)
B u i l d e r : Gorkiy
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 3100 tons (surfaced),
3900 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 2959100 x 28930 x 18980
M a c h i n e r y : 3 diesel engines, 3 electric
motors, 3 shafts. 5570 bhp/8100 shp =
13/15 knots
R a n g e : 14,400 nm at 7 knots snorkeling,
450 nm at 2.5 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 10 x 533mm torpedo tubes (6
bow, 4 stern), total 24 torpedoes or anti-
ship missiles
C o m p l e m e n t : 78
N o t e s : These boats were developed as very-
long-range submarines to supplement to
Project 641 type. Their larger size resulted
from the need to accommodate a large
bow sonar, a sonar intercept and ranging
system, and an underwater communica-
tion set, all linked to a ﬁre control system
for the RPK-2 Viyoga (NATO designation
SS-N-15 Starﬁsh) solid-fuel rocket missile
launched through the torpedo tubes.
All but four boats went into reserve in
1998, and none remained operational by
2004.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: SOVIET UNION 355

SOVIET UNION: PROJECT 705 [NATO ALFA] (1972)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

K-377 (1972), K-373 (1978), K-316 (1979),
K-463 (1982)
B u i l d e r : Sudomekh
K-123 (1979), K-432 (1982), K-493 (1983)
B u i l d e r : Severodvinsk
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2324 tons (surfaced),
3210 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 261920 x 31910 x 23930
M a c h i n e r y : 1 BM-40A (Severodvinsk
boats—OK-550) liquid lead-bismuth re-
a c t o r, 1 geared steam turbine, 1 shaft.
40,000 shp = 12/41 knots
Endurance: 50 days
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 18 torpedoes or antisubma-
rine missiles
C o m p l e m e n t : 29
N o t e s : The design for this class was revo-
lutionary. It combined a streamlined tita-
nium hull (for great strength, small size,
and deep diving) with a powerful liquid
metal–cooled reactor and extensive
automation (to reduce crew size), result-
ing in the Project 705 type’s becoming
the fastest and deepest-diving class of
submarines yet developed: it is capable of
close to 45 knots on trials, and of diving
to 2000 feet. Nevertheless, the type en-
countered many problems. The reactor
coolant required constant heating to pre-
vent it from solidifying, necessitating ei-
ther running the reactor at all times or
connecting the boat to an external heat
source. The type’s sensors were unique
and difﬁcult to maintain in service. Some
of the auxiliary machinery also proved
unreliable and difﬁcult to service.
Two boats were modified under Pro-
ject 671 with pressurized water reactors
and used for trials. The prototype, the K-
377, was stricken in 1974 after its reac-
tor coolant solidified; the others were
stricken by 1993.356 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: SOVIET UNION

SOVIET UNION: PROJECT 671RT [NATO VICTOR II] (1972)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

K - 3 8 7 (2 September 1972), K - 3 7 1 ( 1 9 7 4 ) ,
K - 4 7 6 (1975), K - 4 8 8 , K - 4 9 5 (1976), K -
513, K-517 (1977)
B u i l d e r : Admiralty
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 4245 tons (surfaced),
5700 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 328900 x 34990 x 23970
M a c h i n e r y : 2 VM-5P pressurized water
reactors, 1 geared steam turbine, 1 shaft.
31,000 shp = 18/30 knots
Endurance: 60 days
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 533mm torpedo tubes, 2 x
650mm torpedo tubes (all bow), total 18
plus 6 torpedoes or 36 mines
C o m p l e m e n t : 100
N o t e s : Two elements drove this develop-
ment of the original Project 671 design:
accommodating the heavier Type 65–76
torpedo and substantially reducing noise.
The machinery was mounted on a shock-
absorbing 0raft0 to isolate it from the hull
and limit noise emission. In addition,
these boats carried the appreciably im-
proved Skat sonar system. All seven sub-
marines were decommissioned in 1995–
1996.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: SOVIET UNION 357

PROJECT 670M [NATO CHARLIE II] (1973)

K-452 Berkut (1973), K-458 (1975), K-479
(1977), K-503 (1978), K-508 (1979), K-
209 (1980)
B u i l d e r : Gorkiy
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 4250 tons (surfaced),
5270 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 344910 x 32960 x 26970
M a c h i n e r y : 1 VM-4 pressurized water
reactors, 1 geared steam turbine, 1 shaft.
18,800 shp = 12/24 knots
Endurance: 50 days
A r m a m e n t : 8 x P-120 antiship missiles, 4
x 533mm torpedo tubes, 2 x 400mm tor-
pedo tubes (all bow), total 12 plus 4 tor-
pedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 90
N o t e s : The original Project 670 design
was enlarged to accommodate longer-
range P-120 Malachite solid-fuel antiship
missiles, Skat-M sonar, and improved ﬁr e
control systems. All these submarines
were decommissioned by 1994.

PROJECT 671RTM [NATO VICTOR III] (1977)

K-138 (August 1977), K-218 (1978), K-244
(1979), K-254, K-292 (1980), K-298, K-
2 9 9 (1981), K - 2 5 5 (July 1982), K - 3 2 4 ,
K-398 Murmanskiy Komsomolets (1982),
K-388 (July 1983), K-414 (1984), K-448
(1985), K - 5 0 2 (June 1988), K - 5 2 4 ( A u-
gust 1989), K-527 (October 1991)
B u i l d e r : Admiralty
K-242 50 Let Komsomolsk-na-Amur (1978),
K - 2 4 7 , K - 2 5 1 (1979), K - 2 6 4 (1980), K -
3 0 5 (1981), K - 3 5 5 (1982), K - 3 6 0
(1983), K - 4 1 2 (June 1984), K - 4 9 2
(1987), K-507 (August 1989)
B u i l d e r : Komsomolsk
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 4750 tons (surfaced),
5980 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 351940 x 34990 x 26930
M a c h i n e r y : 2 VM-5P pressurized water
reactors, 1 geared steam turbine, 1 shaft.
31,000 shp = 18/31 knots
Endurance: 80 days
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 533mm torpedo tubes, 2 x
650mm torpedo tubes (all bow), total 18
plus 6 torpedoes or antiship missiles
C o m p l e m e n t : 82
N o t e s : This class featured still further ad-
vances in weaponry and sensors over its
precursors. It was equipped to launch the
RPK-55 Granat cruise missile through its
torpedo tubes in addition to wire-guided
torpedoes and mines. In addition to the
improved Skat-K sonar in the bow, it car-
ried a Pithon towed array sonar launched
from a pod atop the stern ﬁn. The addi-
tional compartment forward of the sail
accommodated improved electronics,
navigation systems, and radio and satel-
lite communication systems. Quieting
was enhanced by installing tandem four-
bladed propellers in place of the single
ﬁve-bladed units of the previous boats.
The ﬁnal ﬁve submarines of this group
were built to Project 671RTMK.
These boats were the ﬁrst in the Soviet
ﬂeet to incorporate a fully integrated sub-
marine combat direction and ﬁre control
command system. They also received the
new Koloss nonacoustic sensor system.358 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: SOVIET UNION

SOVIET UNION: PROJECT 877 [NATO KILO] (1980)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

B-177, B-187, B-190, B-219, B-224, B-227,
B - 2 2 9 , B - 2 4 8 , B - 2 6 0 , B - 3 4 5 , B - 3 5 6 , B -
394 Komsomolets Tadjikistana, B-401, B-
402, B-404 Tyumenskiy Komsomolets, B-
4 0 5 , B - 4 2 5 , B-437 Magnitogorskiy
K o m s o m o l e t s , B - 4 3 9 , B - 4 4 5 , B - 4 5 9 , B -
4 6 4 , B - 4 6 8 , B - 4 7 0 , B - 4 7 1 , B - 4 9 4 , B -
8 0 0 , B - 8 0 6 , B - 8 7 1 , B-880 Delfin
(1982–1994)
B u i l d e r : Gorkiy and Komsomolsk
[ R o m a n i a ] —D e l f i n u l (1986), [Po l a n d ] —
O r z e l (1986), [India]—S i n d h u g o s h
(1986), S i n d h u d v a j (1987), S i n d h u r a j
(1987), S i n d h u v i r (1988), S i n d h u r a t n a
(1988), Sindhukesari (1989), Sindhukirti
(1990), Sindhuvijay (1991), S i n d h u r a k-
shak (1997), S i n d h u s h a s t r a (2000), [Al-
g e r i a ] —Rajs Hadi Mubarek (1987), E l
Hadi Slimani (1988), [Iran]—Ta r e q
(1991), N o o r (1992), Yu n e s ( 1 9 9 3 ) ,
[China]—364 (1994), 365 (1995)
B u i l d e r : Sudomekh
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2300 tons (surfaced),
3036 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 238910 x 32960 x 20940
M a c h i n e r y : 2 1000-KW diesel genera-
tors, 1 electric motor, 1 shaft. 5500 shp =
10/17 knots
R a n g e : 6000 nm at 7 knots snorkeling,
400 nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 18 torpedoes, 8 Strela–3 or
Igla missiles
C o m p l e m e n t : 52
N o t e s : The Project 877 type was designed
as an antisubmarine warfare platform
with good patrol and reconnaissance
characteristics. It was the first SovietTHE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: SOVIET UNION 359

conventionally powered type to use a
teardrop hull form. Great attention was
paid to noise reduction through rafting
m a c h i n e r y, eliminating flooding ports,
locating the dive planes further aft, and
providing an anechoic coating for the
hull. Careful design and choice of mate-
rials also drastically reduced the type’s
magnetic signature. These boats also in-
troduced extensive automation of both
ship and fire control to reduce crew size
and improve safety. Later boats incorpo-
rated improved fire control systems and
the capability to launch wire-guided
t o r p e d o e s .
Large numbers of this type were built
for export, usually with a slightly less ca-
pable sensor outﬁt. Most of the Russian
boats went into reserve around 2000, but
the export boats are still very active.

PROJECT 949 [NATO OSCAR I] (1980)

K-525 A r k h a n g e l s k (April 1980), K - 2 0 6
Murmansk (December 1982)
B u i l d e r : Severodvinsk
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 12,500 tons (surfaced),
22,500 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 472940 x 59980 x 30920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 OK-650b pressurized wa-
ter reactors, 2 geared steam turbines, 2
shafts. 100,000 shp = 15/30 knots
Endurance: 50 days
A r m a m e n t : 24 x P-700 antiship missiles,
4 x 533mm torpedo tubes, 4 x 650mm
torpedo tubes (all bow), total 28 torpe-
does
C o m p l e m e n t : 107
N o t e s : Missile attack operations against
U.S. carrier groups were the principal
roles for these boats. The design featured
a double-hull with about 10 feet between
the two skins. The missile tubes, angled
at about 40 degrees, were ﬁtted between
the two hulls, and the remainder of
the space was filled largely with sound-
deadening material to reduce noise emis-
sion. Rafted machinery and an anechoic
coating also served to reduce the type’s
acoustic signature. Missile targeting data
was acquired from an overhead satellite
system or transmitted via a towed very-
low-frequency buoy array. These two
boats were decommissioned in 1996.360 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: SOVIET UNION

PROJECT 945A [NATO SIERRA I] (1983)

K-239 Tu l a (29 July 1983), K-276 Krab
(June 1986)
B u i l d e r : Gorkiy
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 6300 tons (surfaced),
8300 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 351900 x 40900 x 31920
M a c h i n e r y : 1 OK-650a pressurized wa-
ter cooled reactor, 1 geared steam tur-
bine, 1 shaft. 50,000 shp = 18/35 knots
Endurance: 50 days
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 533mm torpedo tubes, 2 x
650mm torpedo tubes (all bow), total 28
plus 12 torpedoes or missiles
C o m p l e m e n t : 59
N o t e s : Project 945 generated a very suc-
cessful attack submarine for the Soviet
fleet. The titanium double hull was
carefully streamlined and covered with
an anechoic tile coating, which, com-
bined with the use of machinery rafting
and a sophisticated propeller design,
dramatically reduced the type’s noise
and magnetic signatures. A u t o m a t i o n
for ship and fire control was expanded, a
sophisticated sensor and countermea-
sure suite was incorporated, and the
larger torpedo tubes could also be used
to launch S-10 Granit cruise missiles.
The Tula collided with the U.S. sub-
marine Baton Rouge on 11 Fe b r u a r y
1992 off the Kola peninsular. Both these
boats were decommissioned in 1997 and
placed in reserve.

PROJECT 971 [NATO AKULA I] (1984)

K-263 Delfin (15 July 1984), K-284 Puma
(30 December 1984), K-322 Kashalot
(July 1987), K-391 Kit (April 1989), K -
331 Narval (June 1990), K-419 Morzh
(May 1992), K-267 Drakon (4 A u g u s t
1994)
B u i l d e r : Komsomolsk
K-480 Bars (May 1988), K-317 Pa n t e r a
(May 1990), K-461 Volk (June 1991), K-
328 Leopard (6 October 1992), K - 1 5 7
Tigr (10 July 1993)
B u i l d e r : Severodvinsk
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 8140 tons (surfaced),
10,700 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 361990 x 44970 x 31990
M a c h i n e r y : 2 OK-650b pressurized wa-
ter reactors, 1 OK-7 geared steam tur-
bine, 2 OK-2 turbo-generators, 1 shaft.
50,000 shp = 13/33 knots
Endurance: 80 days
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 533mm torpedo tubes, 4 x
650mm torpedo tubes (all bow), total 28
plus 12 torpedoes or missiles
C o m p l e m e n t : 73
N o t e s : This class was developed as a
cheaper alternative to the sophisticated
and expensive Project 945 type. In place
of titanium, the pressure hull used high-
tensile, low-magnetism steel, cutting
both the cost of materials and of the la-
bor and specialized facilities required to
weld titanium. To limit the type’s
acoustic signature, it features machinery
rafting, an anechoic coating on the outer
hull, careful attention to streamlining,
spring-loaded covers for all limber holes,
a sophisticated propeller design, and ac-
tive noise suppression. The weapons load
matches that of the Type 945, with the
same capability for launching S-10
Granit cruise missiles from the larger tor-
pedo tubes.
The P u m a was stricken in 1995, and
the remainder of this group went into re-
serve in 1999.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: SOVIET UNION 361

SOVIET UNION: PROJECT 949A [NATO OSCAR II] (1985), K - 1 1 9 V O R O N E Z H
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

K-148 Orenburg (August 1985), K - 1 3 2
I r k u t s k (March 1986), K-119 Vo r o n e z h
(December 1987), K-173 Krasnoyarsk
(January 1989), K-410 Smolensk ( D e-
cember 1989), K-442 Chelyabinsk (Janu-
ary 1990), K-456 Viliuczinsk (December
1991), K-266 Orel (22 May 1992), K -
186 Omsk (8 May 1993), K-141 Kursk
(May 1994), K-512 To m s k (18 July
1995), K-530 Belgorod (May 1998)
B u i l d e r : Severodvinsk
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 14,700 tons (surfaced),
24,000 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 505930 x 59980 x 30920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 OK-650b pressurized wa-
ter reactors, 2 geared steam turbines, 2
shafts. 100,000 shp = 15/30 knots
Endurance: 50 days
A r m a m e n t : 24 x P-700 antiship missiles,
4 x 533mm torpedo tubes, 4 x 650mm
torpedo tubes (all bow), total 28 torpe-
does
C o m p l e m e n t : 107
N o t e s : These boats were slightly longer
than the earlier Project 949 submarines,
to allow more extensive rafting of ma-
chinery in order to reduce their acoustic
signature. Three additional boats were
not completed.
The K u r s k sank after an accident on
12 August 2000 about 100 miles from
Murmansk. By 2006 about six of the
class remained in active service, with the
remainder laid up in reserve.362 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: SOVIET UNION

SOVIET UNION: PROJECT 945B [NATO SIERRA II] (1988)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

K-534 Pskov (May 1990), K-338 Nizhniy
Novgorod (June 1992), K-123 Mars (July
1992)
B u i l d e r : Gorkiy
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 6300 tons (surfaced),
8300 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 351900 x 40900 x 31920
M a c h i n e r y : 1 OK-650a pressurized wa-
ter reactor, 1 geared steam turbine, 1
shaft. 50,000 shp = 18/35 knots
Endurance: 50 days
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 533mm torpedo tubes, 4 x
650mm torpedo tubes (all bow), total 28
plus 12 torpedoes or missiles
C o m p l e m e n t : 59
N o t e s : These boats featured a longer hull
incorporating improved machinery noise
reduction measures. It is not certain that
the M a r s was ever completed, and it
seems certain that two other units were
broken up before launching. The first
two boats were still operational in 2006.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: RUSSIA 363

R U S S I A
PROJECT 971M [NATO AKULA II] (1994)

Ve p r (10 December 1994), G e p a r d ( 1 9 9 8 ) ,
Kuguar (1999), Rys (2000)
B u i l d e r : Severodvinsk
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 8140 tons (surfaced),
10,700 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 361990 x 44970 x 31990
M a c h i n e r y : 2 OK-650b pressurized wa-
ter reactors, 1 OK-7 geared steam tur-
bine, 2 OK-2 turbo-generators, 1 shaft.
50,000 shp = 13/33 knots
Endurance: 80 days
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 533mm torpedo tubes, 4 x
650mm torpedo tubes (all bow), total 28
plus 12 torpedoes or missiles
C o m p l e m e n t : 73
N o t e s : These boats were longer than the
Project 971 boats, in order to accommo-
date a slow-speed transmission to reduce
propeller noise. In addition, they received
an additional anechoic coating on the in-
ner face of the hull, more elaborate insu-
lation of the machinery raft, and upgraded
s e n s o r s .

PROJECT 636 (NATO KILO) (1996)

[ C h i n a ] —3 6 6 (24 April 1997), 3 6 7 ( 1 7
June 1998), 3 6 8 (4 April 2001) plus 6
unknown (2003–2005) plus 1 building
B u i l d e r : Sudomekh
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2350 tons (surfaced),
3126 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 242910 x 32960 x 20940
M a c h i n e r y : 2 1000-KW diesel genera-
tors, 1 electric motor, 1 shaft. 6800 shp =
11/19 knots
R a n g e : 7500 nm at 7 knots snorkeling,
400 nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 18 torpedoes, 8 Strela–3 or
Igla missiles
C o m p l e m e n t : 52
N o t e s : The Project 636 type is an im-
provement on the earlier Project 877.
The extra length was used to accommo-
date more powerful machinery mounted
on improved rafts and running at half the
speed of the previous installation, driving
a seven-bladed skewed propeller, thus
substantially reducing noise and increas-
ing range. All orders for the type so far
have come from China.364 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: SWEDEN

PROJECT 677 LADA CLASS (2003)

B-100 Sankt Pe t e r s b u r g (November 2003)
2+ boats
B u i l d e r : Admiralty
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1675 tons (surfaced),
2800 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 2199100 x 23970 x 14950
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel generators, 1 electric
m o t o r, 1 shaft. 2700 shp = 11/22 knots
R a n g e : 6000 nm at 7 knots snorkeling,
650 nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 18 torpedoes or missiles
C o m p l e m e n t : 41
N o t e s : The Project 677 type is one of a
family of designs developed by the Rubin
design bureau for advanced convention-
ally powered submarines in a range of
sizes from 550 to 1850 tons surfaced. It
uses machinery arrangements and hull
features very similar to those of the
Project 636 to minimize acoustic and
magnetic signatures. It is designed to in-
corporate an air-independent propulsion
system at a later date, should that be-
come necessary. The designers have high
hopes of export success with this design,
though as of 2006 the only customer has
been the Russian ﬂeet.

S W E D E N
H A J E N CLASS (1954)

Hajen (11 December 1954), Sälen (2 Octo-
ber 1955), Bävern (3 February 1958), Ut-
tern (14 November 1958)
B u i l d e r : Kockums
Valen (21 May 1955), Illern (14 November
1957)
B u i l d e r : Karlskrona
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 785 tons (surfaced), 900
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 216960 x 16960 x 16950
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Pielstick diesel engines, 1
ASEA electric motors, 2 shafts. 1660
bhp/2200 shp = 16/20 knots
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 8 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 64
N o t e s : The design for these boats was de-
veloped from extensive study of a salved
German Type XXI submarine, the U -
3503. They were stricken in 1980.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: SWEDEN 365

D R A K E N CLASS (1960)

D r a k e n (1 April 1960), Va r g e n (20 May
1960), N o r d k a m p e n (8 March 1961),
Springaren (30 August 1961)
B u i l d e r : Kockums
G r i p e n (31 May 1960), D e l ﬁn e n (7 March
1962)
B u i l d e r : Karlskrona
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 835 tons (surfaced), 950
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 226960 x 16990 x 17950
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Pielstick diesel engines, 2
ASEA electric motors, 1 shaft. 1600
bhp/2150 shp = 17/22 knots
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 12 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 36
N o t e s : These boats were very similar to
the previous H a j e n type but featured an
extended stern to accommodate a gear-
box driving a single ﬁve-bladed propeller
for reduced noise and higher speed. They
were modernized in 1970–1971, receiv-
ing new sensors.
The D r a k e n and the G r i p e n w e r e
stricken in 1981.The other boats received
an extensive upgrade, including new
sails, sensors, and noise reduction, and
were taken out of service in 1988.

S J Ö O R M E N CLASS (1967)

Sjöormen (25 January 1967), Sjölejonet (29
June 1967), Sjöhunden (21 March 1968)
B u i l d e r : Kockums
S j ö b j o r n e t (9 January 1968), S j ö h ä s t e n ( 6
August 1968)
B u i l d e r : Karlskrona
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 835 tons (surfaced), 950
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 165970 x 20900 x 19900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Pielstick diesel engines, 1
ASEA electric motor, 1 shaft. 2200
bhp/1700 shp = 15/20 knots
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 533mm torpedo tubes, 2 x
400mm torpedo tubes (all bow)
C o m p l e m e n t : 23
N o t e s : This design introduced a teardrop
hull, X-tail, and sail mounted planes for
improved submerged maneuverability
and performance. They received a new
sonar suite and fire control system in
1984–1985. The S j ö l e j o n e t and the
Sjöhunden were again upgraded between
1992 and 1994, acquiring new electron-
ics and a towed sonar array. Singapore
purchased all five boats in 1995, the
S j ö b j o r n e t being cannibalized for spares
and the S j ö o r m e n and the S j ö h ä s t e n b e-
ing upgraded to match the Sjölejonet and
the S j ö h u n d e n . They were renamed the
C e n t u r i o n , the C h a l l e n g e r, the C o n-
q u e r o r, and the C h i e f t a i n , and all com-
missioned by 2004.366 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: SWEDEN

N Ä C K E N CLASS (1978)

Näcken (17 April 1978), Neptun (6 Decem-
ber 1978), Najad (13 August 1979)
B u i l d e r : Kockums and Karlskrona
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 980 tons (surfaced),
1150 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 162950 x 18980 x 18900
M a c h i n e r y : 1 MTU diesel engine, 1 Jeu-
mont-Schneider electric motor, 1 shaft.
2100 bhp/1540 shp = 20/25 knots
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes, 2 x
400mm torpedo tubes (all bow), total 12
torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 19
N o t e s : This class was a smaller version of
the previous group, with a single diesel
engine and highly automated machinery
and tactical control. The N ä c k e n w a s
lengthened to 188980 in 1987–1988 to ac-
commodate two Stirling air- i n d e p e n d e n t
propulsion units, allowing it to operate
submerged for up to 14 days without snor-
keling; it also received an anechoic cover-
ing for the hull.
The N e p t u n and the N a j a d w e r e
placed in storage reserve in 1998–1999.
The N ä c k e n was leased to Denmark as
the K r o n b o r g in 2001 and returned to
Sweden in 2004.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: SWEDEN 367

SWEDEN: V Ä S T E R G Ö T L A N D CLASS (1986), S Ö D E R M A N L A N D (1988)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

V ä s t e r g ö t l a n d (17 September 1986), H ä l s-
ingland (31 August 1987), Södermanland
(12 April 1988), Östergötland (9 Decem-
ber 1988)
B u i l d e r : Kockums and Karlskrona
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1070 tons (surfaced),
1143 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 159910 x 199110 x 18940
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Hedemora diesel engines,
1 electric motor, 1 shaft. 2160 bhp/1800
shp = 11/20 knots
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes, 4 x
400mm torpedo tubes (all bow), total 18
torpedoes, 22 mines
C o m p l e m e n t : 20
N o t e s : This Kockums design introduced
advanced ﬂank array sensors in addition
to the large bow sonar and towed array.
They incorporate a high degree of noise
reduction, including an anechoic hull
coating. The mines are carried in external
canisters. These boats were built jointly
by Kockums and Karlskrona, with the for-
mer constructing the midsection and the
latter the bow and stern sections.
The S ö d e r m a n l a n d and the Ö s t e r g ö t-
land were lengthened to 1919100 between
2001 and 2004 to accommodate 2 Stir-
ling air-independent propulsion units, al-
lowing them to operate submerged for up
to 14 days withoutsnorkeling. They also
received new thermal imaging and en-
hanced imaging non-hull penetrating
periscopes. The two older boats were re-
tired to storage reserve in 2005.368 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: SWEDEN

[AUSTRALIA]—TYPE 471, C O L L I N S ( 1 9 9 3 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

[ A u s t r a l i a ] —C o l l i n s (28 August 1993),
Fa r n c o m b (15 December 1995), Wa l l e r
(14 March 1997), D e c h a i n e u x ( 1 2
March 1998), S h e e a n (1 May 1999),
Rankin (26 November 2001)
B u i l d e r : ASC
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2500 tons (surfaced),
3298 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 254900 x 25970 x 23900
M a c h i n e r y : 3 Hedemora diesel engines,
1 Jeumont-Schneider electric motor, 1
shaft. 4700 shp = 20/20 knots
R a n g e : 9000 nm at 10 knots snorkeling,
480 nm at 4 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes, total
23 torpedoes or Sub-Harpoon missiles
C o m p l e m e n t : 42
N o t e s : These submarines are claimed to
be the quietest and most shock resistant
in the world. The design is an expansion
of the V ä s t e r g ö t l a n d type, with more so-
phisticated sensors and improved au-
tomation. Kockums and the A u s t r a l i a n
government set up the Australian Subma-
rine Corporation as a joint operation to
build these boats, whose bow and stern
sections were constructed in Sweden. It is
proposed to add the capability of launch-
ing Tomahawk missiles to these boats, but
plans to incorporate air- i n d e p e n d e n t
propulsion have been dropped: these
boats are considered to have excellent
submerged endurance and very low
acoustic signatures in their present state.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: SWEDEN 369

SWEDEN: G O T L A N D CLASS (1995)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

G o t l a n d (2 February 1995), U p p l a n d ( 9
February 1996), H a l l a n d (27 September
1996)
B u i l d e r : Kockums
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1240 tons (surfaced),
1490 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 1969100 x 199110 x 18940
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Hedemora diesel engines,
2 Stirling air-independent generator sets,
1 electric motor, 1 shaft. 3600 bhp/1800
shp = 11/20 knots
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 533mm torpedo tubes, 2 x
400mm torpedo tubes (all bow), total 16
torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 20
N o t e s : These boats essentially are modi-
ﬁed versions of the Västergötland class to
incorporate air-independent propulsion.
They have very highly automated ma-
chinery and combat systems and were
upgraded to operate the Tp62 torpedo,
whose onboard sonar links to the subma-
rine’s ﬁre control system. Unlike the ear-
lier boats, they do not carry a towed
sonar array but are ﬁtted with an active
mine-avoidance system.
Between 2001 and 2003 these boats
received upgraded air-conditioning and
communications systems to suit them
for operations outside the Baltic. In
June 2005 the Gotland began joint oper-
ations with the U.S. Navy so that U.S.
antisubmarine forces could gain real-
time experience against air- i n d e p e n d e n t
conventional submarines.370 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: UNITED KINGDOM

UNITED KINGDOM
P O R P O I S E CLASS (1956), WA L R U S (1959)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

R o r q u a l (5 December 1955), N a r w h a l ( 1 5
March 1956), Porpoise (25 April 1956)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
Grampus (30 May 1957), Finwhale (21 July
1959), Sealion (31 December 1959)
B u i l d e r : Cammell Laird
Cachalot (18 September 1956), Walrus (22
September 1959)
B u i l d e r : Scott
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1975 tons (surfaced),
2303 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 290930 x 26960 x 18930
M a c h i n e r y : 2 ASR diesel engines, 2 En-
glish Electric electric motors, 2 shafts.
3680 bhp/6000 shp = 12/17 knots
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 210 torpedo tubes (6 bow,
2 stern), total 30 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 71
N o t e s : The design for these boats brought
together British experience with S, T, and
A class high-speed submarines and infor-
mation from German Type XXI craft ex-
amined after World War II. They were
very quiet long-range boats and very suc-
cessful. All were withdrawn between
1987 and 1990.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: UNITED KINGDOM 371

UNITED KINGDOM: O B E R O N CLASS, O R P H E U S (1959)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Oberon (18 July 1959), Onslaught (24 Sep-
tember 1960), O c e l o t (5 May 1962),
[ C a n a d a ] —O j i b w a (29 February 1964),
Onandaga (25 September 1965), Okana-
gan (17 September 1966)
B u i l d e r : Chatham
Orpheus (17 November 1959), Olympus (14
June 1961), Osiris (19 November 1962),
[ B r a z i l ] —Humaita (5 October 1971),
To n e l e r o s (22 November 1972), R i-
achuelo (6 September 1975)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
O d i n (4 November 1960), O r a c l e (26 Sep-
tember 1961), O p o s s u m (23 May 1963),
Onyx (18 August 1966)
B u i l d e r : Cammell Laird
Otter (15 May 1961), O t u s (17 October
1962), O p p o r t u n e (14 February 1964),
[ A u s t r a l i a ] —O x l e y (24 September 1965),
O t w a y (29 November 1966), O v e n s (5 De-
cember 1967), O n s l o w (29 August 1968)
[ C h i l e ] —O’ B r i e n (21 December 1972),
H y a t t (26 September 1973), [Aus-
t r a l i a ] —O r i o n (16 September 1974),
O t a m a (2 December 1975)
B u i l d e r : Scott
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2030 tons (surfaced),
2410 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 290930 x 26960 x 18930
M a c h i n e r y : 2 ASR diesel engines, 2 En-
glish Electric electric motors, 2 shafts.
3680 bhp/6000 shp = 12/17 knots
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 210 torpedo tubes (6 bow,
2 stern), total 30 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 64372 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: UNITED KINGDOM

N o t e s : This class introduced high-tensile
steel construction for deeper diving and
very extensive noise reduction, including
rafted machinery. All the class except
the O b e r o n and the O r p h e u s featured a
fiberglass casing in place of the steel
casing of the O b e r o n and the aluminum
casing of the O r p h e u s . Most of these
boats received refits in the 1980s that
upgraded their sensor outfits and fire
control systems.
The British boats were withdrawn
from service between 1987 and 1992, the
O l y m p u s going to Canada as a static
training vessel, and the Onyx and the
O c e l o t becoming museum vessels. The
Brazilian boats were stricken between
1996 and 2001, the Australian craft be-
tween 1997 and 1999, the Canadian ves-
sels between 1998 and 2000, and the
Chilean submarines in 2001–2002.

UNITED KINGDOM: D R E A D N O U G H T (21 OCTOBER 1960)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

B u i l d e r : Barrow
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 3500 tons (surfaced),
4000 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 265990 x 32930 x 26900
M a c h i n e r y : 1 S5W pressurized water re-
a c t o r, 1 steam turbine, 1 shaft. 15,000
shp = 13/28 knots
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 24 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 88
N o t e s : Delays in designing a British sub-
marine reactor led to the decision to turn
to the United States for assistance. Con-
s e q u e n t l y, the Dreadnought combined a
British forward hull with an after section
that essentially adapted contemporary
U.S. practice to British design parame-
ters. In form, the hull bore a strong re-
semblance to contemporary U.S. teardrop
hulls, but the diving planes were mounted
at the bow rather than on the sail.
The Dreadnought was decommis-
sioned in 1980.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: UNITED KINDOM 373

UNITED KINGDOM: VA L I A N T CLASS (1963), WA R S P I T E ( 1 9 6 5 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Va l i a n t (3 December 1963), Wa r s p i t e ( 2 5
September 1965), Churchill (20 Decem-
ber 1968), Courageous (7 March 1970)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
Conqueror (28 August 1969)
B u i l d e r : Cammell Laird
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 4400 tons (surfaced),
4900 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 285900 x 33930 x 27900
M a c h i n e r y : 1 PWR1 pressurized water
r e a c t o r, 1 geared steam turbine, 1 shaft.
15,000 shp = 20/28 knots
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 26 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 103
N o t e s : These boats were an enlarged ver-
sion of the Dreadnought to accommodate
a British-designed reactor that was rather
larger than the U.S. unit. The C o u r a-
g e o u s received an updated sonar outfit,
and the other boats were subsequently re-
ﬁtted to that standard. All boats were ﬁt-
ted to launch Sub-Harpoon missiles in
the early 1980s. They were decommis-
sioned between 1990 and 1992.374 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: UNITED KINDGOM

UNITED KINGDOM: S W I F T S U R E CLASS (1971), S U P E R B (1974)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

S w i f t s u r e (7 August 1971), S o v e r e i g n ( 1 7
February 1972), S u p e r b (30 November
1974), S c e p t r e (20 November 1976),
S p a r t a n (7 April 1978), Splendid (5 Oc-
tober 1979)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 4400 tons (surfaced),
4900 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 272900 x 32940 x 27900
M a c h i n e r y : 1 PWR1 pressurized water
reactor, 2 GEC geared steam turbines, 1
Paxman diesel engine, 1 shaft. 15,000
shp plus 4000 bhp= 20/30 knots
A r m a m e n t : 5 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 21 torpedoes plus 4 Sub-Harpoon
missiles
C o m p l e m e n t : 116
N o t e s : This design features an improved
hull form for better submerged per-
formance and maneuverability, a more
sophisticated fire control system, and
greater noise suppression measures. Dur-
ing the 1990s this class received a new
integrated ﬁre control and sensor outﬁt .
The S w i f t s u r e decommissioned in 1992,
the Splendid in 2003, and the Sovereign
in 2006. The other boats are scheduled
to leave service between 2008 and 2010.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: UNITED KINGDOM 375

UNITED KINGDOM: T R A FA L G A R CLASS (1981)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Tr a f a l g a r (1 July 1981), Tu r b u l e n t (1 De-
cember 1982), Tireless (17 March 1984),
Torbay (8 March 1985), Trenchant (3 No-
vember 1986), Talent (15 April 1988),
Triumph (14 February 1991)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 4700 tons (surfaced),
5200 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 280920 x 32920 x 31930
M a c h i n e r y : 1 PWR1 pressurized water
reactor, 2 GEC geared steam turbines, 1
Paxman diesel engine, 1 shaft. 15,000
shp plus 4000 bhp= 20/31 knots
Endurance: 85 days
A r m a m e n t : 5 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 21 torpedoes plus 4 Sub-Harpoon
missiles
C o m p l e m e n t : 97
N o t e s : Attention to the reduction of
acoustic and magnetic signatures domi-
nated this design. In addition to improved
raft insulation, these boats received an
anechoic covering, a degaussing system,
and new seven-bladed propellers. In the
late 1990s the class began a thorough re-
fit that replaced the propeller with a
pumpjet propulsor system in all but the
Tr a f a l g a r. Beginning in 2001 all are re-
ceiving a new sophisticated integrated
fire and tactical control system together
with substantial upgrades to the sensor
outﬁt.376 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: UNITED KINGDOM

UNITED KINGDOM:
U P H O L D E R CLASS (1986),
[ C A N A D A ] —CORNER BROOK [EX-URSULA, 1991] (1986)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Upholder (2 December 1986)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
U n s e e n (14 November 1989), U r s u l a ( 2 8
February 1991), U n i c o r n (16 April 1992)
B u i l d e r : Cammell Laird
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2220 tons (surfaced),
2455 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 230970 x 25900 x 17980
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Paxman Valenta diesel en-
gines, 1 GEC electric motors, 1 shaft.
5400 shp = 12/20 knots
R a n g e : 8000 nm at 8 knots snorkeling,
230 nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 14 torpedoes plus 4 Sub-Harpoon
missiles
C o m p l e m e n t : 47
N o t e s : This class introduced a teardrop
hull with anechoic tile coating into the
British conventional submarine force.
These boats have an active/passive bow
s o n a r, passive flank arrays, and a towed
sonar array. Their design results in very
low acoustic and magnetic signatures.
The Royal Navy declared this class sur-
plus to requirements in 1994. They were
transferred to Canada as the C h i c o u t i m i ,
the Vi c t o r i a , the Corner Brook, and the
Wi n d s o r and entered service in 2004 after
a major reﬁt .THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: UNITED KINGDOM 377

UNITED KINGDOM: A S T U T E CLASS (2007)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Astute (2007), A m b u s h (2008), A r t f u l
(2010), plus 3 boats
B u i l d e r : Barrow
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 6690 tons (surfaced),
7200 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 318930 x 37900 x 329100
M a c h i n e r y : 1 PWR2 pressurized water
reactor, 2 GEC-Alstom geared steam tur-
bines, 2 Paxman diesel engines, 1 shaft.
27,000 shp plus 4000 bhp= 20/29 knots
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 38 torpedoes or missiles
C o m p l e m e n t : 98
N o t e s : An extensively updated version of
the earlier Tr a f a l g a r type, this type de-
ploys the same new reactor as the Va n-
guard class ballistic missile submarines
and the pumpjet propulsor system of the
modernized Trafalgar group. They will in-
corporate integrated ﬁre and tactical con-
trol systems, Tomahawk missile launch
capability, and very extensive measures to
limit acoustic and magnetic signatures.378 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S

UNITED STAT E S
B A R R A C U D A CLASS (1951)

Barracuda (2 March 1951)
B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
Bass (2 May 1951), Bonita (21 June 1951)
B u i l d e r : Mare Island
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 765 tons (surfaced),
1162 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 196910 x 24970 x 14950
M a c h i n e r y : 3 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 1125 bhp/1050 shp =
13/8.5 knots
R a n g e : 8580 nm at 10 knots surfaced,
358 nm at 2 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 8 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 37
N o t e s : These small boats were designed
as hunter-killer submarines featuring
quiet operation, an effective passive
sonar system, and low cost. They were
found to be too small and slow, while
budgetary restraints in the immediate
postwar period made conversions of ex-
isting ﬂeet boats more attractive as a so-
lution for the hunter-killer requirement.
Their large bow sonars were removed in
1959 and they were reclassiﬁed, the Bar-
r a c u d a becoming a training submarine
and the other boats attack submarines.
The latter submarines were stricken in
1967 and the Barracuda in 1974.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S 379

UNITED STATES: TA N G CLASS (1951)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

H a r d e r (14 June 1951), Tr o u t (21 A u g u s t
1951), Trigger (3 December 1951)
B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
Ta n g (19 June 1951), Wa h o o (16 October
1951), Gudgeon (11 May 1952)
B u i l d e r : Portsmouth
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1821 tons (surfaced),
2260 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 269920 x 27920 x 18900
M a c h i n e r y : 3 FM diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 3400 bhp/4200 shp
= 15.5/18 knots
R a n g e : 11,500 nm at 10 knots surfaced,
129 nm at 3 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 210 torpedo tubes (6 bow,
2 stern), total 26 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 83
N o t e s : These boats incorporated lessons
learned from the German Type XXI sub-
marines. They were shorter, more stream-
lined, and with greater battery capacity
than the wartime fleet boats. The new
0p a n c a k e0 radial diesel engines in the ﬁr s t
four boats caused considerable problems
in service, and they were lengthened to
2 7 8900 and re-engined with four conven-
tional diesels. The ﬁnal pair of boats were
built to that speciﬁcation from the outset.380 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S

The Ta n g , the Wa h o o , and the Tr o u t
were scheduled for transfer to Iran, but
the revolution there intervened. The last
two were stricken between 1978 and
1980, while the Ta n g was transferred to
Turkey with the Gudgeon in 1980 as the
Piri Reis and the Hizir Reis. The latter
was stricken in 2004, and the former was
still operational in 2006. The Trigger and
the H a r d e r were transferred to Italy in
1973–1974 as the Livio Piomarta and the
Romeo Romei and stricken in 1986 and
1988, respectively.

[ P E R U ] —L O B O CLASS (1953)

Tiburon (27 October 1953), Lobo (6 Febru-
ary 1954), Atun (5 February 1957), Mer-
lin (5 February 1957)
B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 825 tons (surfaced),
1400 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 243900 x 22900 x 14900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 GM diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motors, 2 shafts. 2400 bhp/2400 shp
= 16/10 knots
R a n g e : 5000 nm at 10 knots surfaced;
submerged characteristics unknown
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (4 bow,
2 stern)
C o m p l e m e n t : 40
N o t e s : These boats were built to an
updated version of the prewar M a c k e r e l
design with modern sensors. They were
renamed the Abtao, the Dos de Mayo, the
Angamos, and the Iquique in 1957. They
were reﬁtted in 1981 with new batteries
and updated sensors. The Angamos a n d
the I q u i q u e were stricken in 1990 and
1993. The other boats became training
vessels in 1995. The Dos de Mayo w a s
stricken in 2000, and the Abtao became a
museum vessel the same year.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S 381

UNITED STATES: N A U T I L U S (21 JANUARY 1954)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 3180 tons (surfaced),
3500 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 323990 x 27980 x 21990
M a c h i n e r y : 1 S2W pressurized water re-
a c t o r, 2 geared steam turbines, 2 shafts.
13,400 shp = 22/23.25 knots
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 26 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 104
N o t e s : The N a u t i l u s was the world’s ﬁr s t
n u c l e a r-powered submarine. Its hull
form was similar to the German Ty p e
XXI, with a large dome faired into the
forefoot to enclose passive and active
sonar equipment. It had a partial double
hull only, since the size of the nuclear re-
actor required enlarging its compartment
to the outer hull. The N a u t i l u s c o m m i s-
sioned on 30 September 1954 and began
trials on 17 January 1955. It demon-
strated great speed, reliability, and ma-
n e u v e r a b i l i t y, but also was extremely
noisy and suffered from potentially dan-
gerous vibration at speed. The N a u t i l u s
decommissioned on 3 March 1980, was
designated a National Historic Landmark
on 20 May 1982, and is exhibited at the
U.S. Navy Submarine Force Museum in
Groton, Connecticut.382 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S

UNITED STATES: S E AW O L F (21 JULY 1955)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 3741 tons (surfaced),
4287 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 337960 x 27980 x 22900
M a c h i n e r y : 1 S2G liquid sodium reactor,
2 geared steam turbines, 2 shafts. 15,000
shp = 22/20 knots
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 26 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 105
N o t e s : The structural design of the S e a-
wolf closely matched that of the N a u t i l u s ,
except that the bow sonar installation was
m o d i ﬁed for improved performance, and
the hull was slightly larger because the
liquid sodium reactor required additional
shielding. Problems with this plant de-
layed the S e a w o l f’s commissioning until
30 March 1957, but it operated very satis-
factorily thereafter. Nevertheless, in late
1958 the S e a w o l f returned to Electric
Boat, where a new reactor identical to
that of the N a u t i l u s was installed, recom-
missioning on 30 September 1960. In
mid-1967 the S e a w o l f was lengthened
to incorporate facilities for saturation
divers in an additional compartment and
operated thereafter in research and
intelligence-gathering roles until decom-
missioned in 1987.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S 383

S A I L F I S H CLASS (1955)

Sailfish (7 September 1955), S a l m o n ( 2 5
February 1956)
B u i l d e r : Portsmouth
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2625 tons (surfaced),
3180 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 350960 x 29910 x 16940
M a c h i n e r y : 4 FM diesel engines, 2 elec-
tric motor, 2 shafts. 6000 bhp/5200 shp
= 19.5/10 knots
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow)
C o m p l e m e n t : 95
N o t e s : These large boats were built as
radar picket submarines but were too
slow to accompany the carrier force and
were reclassiﬁed as attack submarines in
1961. They were upgraded with PUFFS
passive fire control sonar in the early
1960s and stricken in 1977–1978.

D A R T E R (28 MAY 1956)

B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1872 tons (surfaced),
2372 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 268970 x 27920 x 16990
M a c h i n e r y : 3 FM diesel engines, 2 El-
liott electric motors, 2 shafts. 3100
bhp/4500 shp = 19.5/14 knots
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 210 torpedo tubes (6 bow,
2 stern)
C o m p l e m e n t : 83
N o t e s : The D a r t e r was an improved ver-
sion of the Tang design with a console
control system. It was decommissioned in
1982.

S K AT E CLASS (1957)

Skate (16 May 1957)
B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
Swordﬁsh (27 August 1957), Seadragon (16
August 1958)
B u i l d e r : Portsmouth
Sargo (10 October 1957)
B u i l d e r : Mare Island
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2550 tons (surfaced),
2848 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 267980 x 25900 x 20960
M a c h i n e r y : 1 S3W or S4W pressurized
water reactor, 2 geared steam turbines, 2
shafts. 7300 shp = 15.5/18 knots
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 210 torpedo tubes (6 bow,
2 stern), total 22 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 95
N o t e s : The design for this class was based
on the conventionally powered Ta n g
class, enlarged to accommodate new,
smaller reactors. They entered service in
1958–1959 and were stricken in
1986–1989.384 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S

UNITED STATES: T R I T O N (1958)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 5662 tons (surfaced),
7781 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 447960 x 369110 x 23960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 S4G liquid sodium reac-
tors, 2 geared steam turbines, 2 shafts.
34,000 shp = 28/28 knots
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (4 bow,
2 stern), total 12 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 180
N o t e s : Designed as a radar picket subma-
rine with high surface speed, the Tr i t o n
was the largest submarine in the world
when completed and the only U.S. boat
built with a two-reactor plant. The double
hull essentially was of an enlarged Ta n g
form with a huge sail to accommodate a
conning tower and the retractable (and
very unreliable) air search radar. The nu-
clear plant proved capable of producing
45,000 shp, giving the Tr i t o n a speed of
30 knots. Shortly after commissioning,
the Tr i t o n made an 84-day submerged
voyage around the world. The Tr i t o n w a s
r e c l a s s i ﬁed as an attack submarine soon
after this voyage, but it was too large and
expensive to operate for this mission and
was decommissioned on 3 May 1969, al-
though not stricken from the Navy List
until 1986.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S 385

UNITED STATES: S K I P J A C K CLASS (1958), S C O R P I O N (1959)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Skipjack (26 May 1958), Scorpion (19 De-
cember 1959)
B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
Shark (16 March 1960)
B u i l d e r : Newport News
Sculpin (31 March 1960), Snook (31 Octo-
ber 1960)
B u i l d e r : Ingalls
Scamp (8 October 1960)
B u i l d e r : Mare Island
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 3070 tons (surfaced),
3500 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 252900 x 32900 x 25900
M a c h i n e r y : 1 S5W pressurized water
cooled reactor, 2 geared steam turbines, 1
shaft. 15,000 shp = 15/33 knots
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 24 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 90
N o t e s : The S k i p j a c k design set the basic
pattern for all subsequent U.S. nuclear
attack submarines. It combined the
teardrop body-of-revolution hull form
developed and tested in the A l b a c o r e , a
single propeller behind the rudder and
stern planes, and nuclear power. It also
introduced single-hull construction to
minimize wetted surface area while max-
imizing internal volume and large sail-
mounted forward diving planes to re-
duce noise in the vicinity of the bow
s o n a r. Nevertheless, these boats still
generated considerable noise while oper-
ating submerged, particularly from the
sail planes and the five-bladed propeller;
a seven-bladed unit that rotated more386 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S

slowly was later produced, reducing the
boats9 top speed in the process.
The S c o r p i o n was lost in the A t l a n t i c
on 22 May 1968 near the Azores after an
explosion, probably attributable to one of
its torpedoes. The rest of the class oper-
ated very successfully and were not with-
drawn from service until between and
1986 and 1990.

UNITED STATES: B A R B E L CLASS (1958), B L U E B A C K ( 1 9 5 9 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Barbel (19 July 1958)
B u i l d e r : Portsmouth
Boneﬁsh (22 November 1958)
B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
Blueback (16 May 1959)
B u i l d e r : Ingalls
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2146 tons (surfaced),
2539 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 219920 x 29900 x 20980
M a c h i n e r y : 3 FM diesel engines, 1 West-
inghouse electric motor, 1 shaft. 4800
bhp/3150 shp = 15/21 knots
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow)
C o m p l e m e n t : 77
N o t e s : This class adopted the teardrop
hull and single propeller of the experi-
mental Albacore, albeit with a substantial
deck casing. They introduced controls
centralized in an attack center that
became a standard feature in later U.S.
attack submarines. The deep hull con-
tained three levels, improving the inter-
nal layout. In the late 1960s a refit
moved the diving planes from the bow to
the sail.
The Boneﬁsh was stricken after a seri-
ous ﬁre in 1988, and the other boats fol-
lowed in 1990.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S 387

T U L L I B E E (27 APRIL 1960)

B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2177 tons (surfaced),
2607 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 272990 x 23940 x 19940
M a c h i n e r y : 1 S2C pressurized water re-
actor, 1 steam turbine, 1 turbo-alternator,
1 electric motor, 1 shaft. 2500 shp =
13/16 knots
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 12 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 36
N o t e s : The Tullibee was a prototype for a
small nuclear-powered hunter-killer sub-
marine. Three elements were paramount
in its design: quiet operation, powerful
advanced sensors, and low cost. The
Tu l l i b e e introduced a new, small reactor
and turbo-electric drive that eliminated
noisy gearing and provided very rapid
response. Its AN/BQQ-1 sonar system
was the navy’s ﬁrst integrated sonar sys-
tem, combining powerful passive and ac-
tive elements into a single large unit in-
stalled in the bow dome. This, in turn,
displaced the torpedo tubes, which were
mounted ﬁring at an angle from the cen-
terline. The goal of lower cost, however,
was not sufficiently achieved: the boat’s
size could not be constrained, and the
price for nuclear power and advanced
sensors was essentially independent of
hull size. The Tullibee was considered too
slow for long ocean transits; the cost sav-
ings were insufﬁcient; and the U.S. Navy
decided to concentrate on more flexible
attack submarines. It conducted mainly
experimental work and was stricken on
18 June 1988.388 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S

UNITED STATES: T H R E S H E R CLASS (1960), B A R B (1962)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

T h r e s h e r (9 July 1960), Ja c k (24 A p r i l
1963), Tinosa (9 December 1961)
B u i l d e r : Portsmouth
Permit (1 July 1961), Plunger (9 December
1961)
B u i l d e r : Mare Island
Barb (12 February 1962), Dace (18 August
1962), Haddock (21 May 1966)
B u i l d e r : Ingalls
Po l l a c k (17 March 1962), H a d d o (18 A u-
gust 1962), Guardﬁsh (15 May 1965)
B u i l d e r : New York
F l a s h e r (22 June 1963), G r e e n l i n g (4 A p r i l
1964), Gato (14 May 1964)
B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 3750 tons (surfaced),
4310 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 278960 x 31980 x 26900
M a c h i n e r y : 1 S5W pressurized water re-
a c t o r, 2 geared steam turbines, 1 shaft.
15,000 shp = 15/28 knots
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 25 torpedoes or antisubmarine mis-
siles
C o m p l e m e n t : 88
N o t e s : This class represented the start of
a second generation of nuclear- p o w e r e d
attack submarines. Great emphasis was
placed on reducing noise emission, im-
proving sensors, adding more sophisti-
cated weapons, hardening the design
against shock, and substantially increas-
ing diving depth. Quieting was accom-
plished by mounting the machinery on a
platform insulated from the hull (a “raft”)
so that noise would not radiate into the
surrounding water. The raft arrangement
also assisted in diminishing shock impact
from explosions nearby. The large and so-
phisticated AN/BQQ-2 sonar, 15 feet in
diameter, dominated the bow of the boat
and led to the installation of torpedoTHE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S 389

tubes farther aft that angled out from the
centerline. In addition to new torpedoes,
this class also could fire the new SUB-
ROC rocket-propelled nuclear depth
charge. Improved construction tech-
niques and fittings endowed this class
with a test depth of 1300 feet rather than
the 700 feet of the previous S k i p j a c k
class. The Ja c k was slightly different from
other members of the class in using two
contra-rotating screws. The three Electric
Boat submarines were lengthened to
2 9 2930, with an additional compartment
for submarine safety features (SUBSAFE)
developed as a result of the T h r e s h e r
d i s a s t e r, and also to provide space for
crew and equipment for intelligence-
gathering. They also had larger sails, with
additional masts for the same purpose.
The T h r e s h e r sank on 10 April 1963
during a postoverhaul trial. The likeliest
cause was the failure of a ﬁtting or weld
that caused a leak that probably short-
circuited an electrical panel, leading to
the machinery shutting down. Wi t h o u t
power the submarine could not surface
and sank below its crush depth. The re-
mainder of the class were stricken in
1990–1991.390 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S

UNITED STATES: S T U R G E O N CLASS (1963), S E A H O R S E (1968)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

S t u r g e o n (26 February 1965), Pa r g o ( 1 7
September 1966), B e r g a l l (17 Fe b r u a r y
1968), Seahorse (15 August 1968), Flying
Fish (17 May 1969), Trepang (27 August
1969), B l u e ﬁs h (10 January 1970), B i l l-
ﬁsh (1 May 1970), Archerﬁsh (16 January
1971), Silversides (4 June 1971), Batﬁsh
(9 October 1971), C a v a l l a (19 Fe b r u a r y
1972)
B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
Queenﬁsh (25 February 1966), Ray (21 June
1966), L a p o n (16 December 1966),
H a m m e r h e a d (14 May 1967), Sea Devil
(5 October 1967), S p a d e f i s h (15 May
1968), Fi n b a c k (7 December 1968), L .
Mendel Rivers (2 June 1973), Richard B.
Russell (12 January 1974)
B u i l d e r : Newport News
Whale (14 October 1966), Sunﬁsh (14 Oc-
tober 1966),
B u i l d e r : Quincy
Tautog (14 April 1967), Pogy (3 June 1967),
A s p r o (29 November 1967), P u f f e r ( 3 0
March 1989), William H. Bates (11 De-
cember 1971), Tu n n y (10 June 1972),
Parche (13 January 1973)
B u i l d e r : Ingalls
G u r n a r d (20 May 1967), Guittaro (27 July
1968), Hawkbill (12 April 1969), Pintado
(18 August 1969), Drum (25 May 1970)
B u i l d e r : Mare Island
G r a y l i ng (22 June 1967), Sand Lance ( 1 1
November 1969)
B u i l d e r : PortsmouthTHE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S 391

D i s p l a c e m e n t : 4250 tons (surfaced),
4780 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 282900 x 31980 x 289100
M a c h i n e r y : 1 S5W pressurized water re-
a c t o r, 2 geared steam turbines, 1 shaft.
15,000 shp = 15/27 knots
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 25 torpedoes or antisubmarine mis-
siles
C o m p l e m e n t : 99
N o t e s : This class was essentially a modiﬁ-
cation of the previous T h r e s h e r type. It
added a larger sail and diving planes that
could rotate vertically to allow penetra-
tion through Arctic ice. The final ten
boats were 10 feet longer, the extra com-
partment providing additional space for
crew and equipment for intelligence-
gathering. The Pa r c h e was modified for
special deep sea search and recovery mis-
sions between 1987 and 1991, lengthen-
ing the boat by 100 feet. The Parche was
stricken in 2003, while the other boats in
the class were stricken between 1991 and
2000.

NARWHAL (9 SEPTEMBER 1968)

B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 4450 tons (surfaced),
5350 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 314900 x 31980 x 26900
M a c h i n e r y : 1 S5G natural circulation
pressurized water reactor, 2 direct-drive
steam turbines, 1 shaft. 15,000 shp =
15/26 knots
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 25 torpedoes or antisubmarine
missiles
C o m p l e m e n t : 99
N o t e s : The N a r w h a l was a lengthened
version of the Sturgeon design. Its reactor
plant was changed to use natural circula-
tion via convection in place of pumps to
move the pressurized water, greatly re-
ducing machinery noise. In addition it
also used slow-speed, direct drive tur-
bines in place of the geared turbines of
earlier boats, again to reduce noise. This
installation, although requiring more
space, proved so successful that it was
adopted as standard in all later boats.
The N a r w h a l was stricken on 1 July
1999.392 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S

[THE NETHERLANDS]—ZWAARDVIS CLASS (1970),
[ TA I WA N —HAI LUNG ( 1 9 8 6 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

[Netherlands]—Zwaardvis (2 July 1970), Ti-
jgerhaaj (25 May 1971)
B u i l d e r : Rotterdamse
[Taiwan]—Hai Lung (4 October 1986), Hai
Hu (20 December 1986)
B u i l d e r : Fijenoord
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2408 tons (surfaced),
2640 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 219900 x 28900 x 23900
M a c h i n e r y : 3 Werkspoor diesel engines,
1 Holec electric motor, 1 shaft. 4200
bhp/5100 shp = 13/20 knots
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 20 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 67
N o t e s : The design for these boats derived
from the Barbel type, with European sen-
sors. The Dutch boats were upgraded in
the late 1980s with improved sensors,
including a towed sonar array, and
equipped to launch Mk.48 torpedoes.
They were decommissioned in 1989–
1995 and offered for sale. An arrange-
ment for Malaysia to purchase them fell
through after they were shipped there in
2000; they are to be scrapped in Malaysia
in 2006.
Taiwan planned to obtain 6 boats from
The Netherlands to an improved design
with updated sensors, greater automa-
tion, and stowage for up to 28 torpedoes.
Protests from China led the Dutch gov-
ernment to block construction of all but
the first two boats. Taiwan plans to up-
grade these submarines to launch mis-
siles through their torpedo tubes.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S 393

GLENARD P. LIPSCOMB (4 AUGUST 1973)

B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 4450 tons (surfaced),
5350 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 314900 x 31980 x 26900
M a c h i n e r y : 1 S5Wa pressurized water
r e a c t o r, 2 steam turbines, 2 turbo-
alternators, 1 electric motor, 1 shaft.
14,000 shp = 15/23 knots
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 25 torpedoes or antisubmarine
missiles
C o m p l e m e n t : 99
N o t e s : This submarine was a lengthened
version of the S t u r g e o n type. It used a
m o d i ﬁed reactor plant that drove turbo-
alternators to provide direct current for
electric drive at all times. The boat un-
derwent extensive trials. The inefficien-
cies of the system reduced total power
output compared with the standard sys-
tem, and the use of direct current led to
serious overheating problems. The G l e-
nard P. Lipscomb was stricken on 11 July
1990.394 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S

UNITED STATES: LOS ANGELES C L A S S (1974)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Los Angeles (6 April 1974), Baton Rouge (26
April 1976), M e m p h i s (3 April 1976),
Cincinnati (19 February 1977), Birming-
h a m (29 October 1977), San Fr a n c i s c o
(27 October 1979), Atlanta (16 A u g u s t
1980), H o u s t o n (21 March 1981), N o r-
f o l k (21 October 1981), B u f f a l o (8 May
1982), Salt Lake City (16 October 1982),
O l y m p i a (30 April 1983), H o n o l u l u ( 2 4
September 1983), C h i c a g o (13 October
1984), Key We s t (20 July 1985), O k l a-
homa City (2 November 1985), Newport
News (15 March 1986), Albany (13 June
1987), Scranton (3 July 1988), Asheville
(28 October 1989), Jefferson City (17 Au-
gust 1990), B o i s e (23 March 1991),
M o n t p e l i e r (23 August 1991), H a m p t o n
(3 April 1992), C h a r l o t t e (3 October
1992), To l e d o (28 August 1993), Tu c s o n
(19 March 1994), G r e e n v i l l e (17 Sep-
tember 1994), Cheyenne (18 April 1995)
B u i l d e r : Newport News
Philadelphia (19 October 1974), Groton (9
October 1976), New York City (18 June
1977), Indianapolis (30 July 1977), Om-
a h a (21 February 1978), B r e m e r t o n ( 2 2
July 1978), Ja c k s o n v i l l e (19 November
1978), Dallas (28 April 1979), La Jo l l a
(11 August 1979), Phoenix (8 December
1979), Boston (19 April 1980), Baltimore
(13 December 1980), City of Corpus
Christi (25 April 1981), Albuquerque (13
March 1982), Portsmouth (18 Septem-
ber 1982), Minneapolis-St Pa u l (18 De-
cember 1982), Hyman G. Rickover ( 2 7
August 1983), Au g u s t a (21 January
1984), Providence (4 August 1984), Pitts-
b u r g h (8 December 1984), L o u i s v i l l eTHE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S 395

(14 December 1985), H e l e n a (28 June
1986), San Ju a n (6 December 1986),
Pa s a d e n a (12 September 1987), To p e k a
(23 January 1988), Miami (12 November
1988), A l e x a n d r i a (23 June 1990), A n-
napolis (19 May 1991), S p r i n g f i e l d ( 4
January 1992), C o l u m b u s (1 A u g u s t
1992), Santa Fe (12 December 1992),
H a r t f o r d (4 December 1993), C o l u m b i a
(24 September 1994)
B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 6080 tons (surfaced),
6927 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 362900 x 33900 x 32900
M a c h i n e r y : 1 S6G pressurized water re-
a c t o r, 2 steam turbines, 1 shaft. 30,000
shp = 33 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 25 torpedoes or antisubmarine mis-
siles
C o m p l e m e n t : 141
N o t e s : The design for the Los A n g e l e s
class represented a huge increase in size
(close to 50 percent) over the previous
S t u r g e o n-type attack submarines. The
motivation for this increase was a desire
to return to the speed of the S k i p j a c k
class while maintaining or improving on
the S t u r g e o n c l a s s ’s quiet operation and
powerful sonar array. This required a
great increase in power output from the
r e a c t o r, achieved by adapting a surface
warship unit for submarine use. Never-
theless, despite the increase in power
and concomitant growth in size, the Los
Angeles class design gave up the ability to
operate under ice and minelaying capa-
bilities; its test depth was reduced to 950
feet, more than a 25 percent reduction.
Production of the Los Angeles c l a s s
was plagued with problems, both within
the political and military establishments
for funding and in the yards, where de-
lays and cost over-runs became endemic.
Consequently, construction of the entire
class was spread over a 20 period. During
that time the design beneﬁted from some
modiﬁcations. The second 32 boats were
ﬁtted with 12 vertical launch tubes in the
forward ballast tanks for Tomahawk mis-
siles, increasing the total weapon load to
37 torpedoes or missiles. The final 23
units additionally received modiﬁc a t i o n s
permitting operation under ice (with
bow-mounted retractable diving planes),
minelaying capabilities, and improved
noise suppression and quieting, being
designated the Improved Los A n g e l e s
class.
Eleven boats (the Baton Rouge, t h e
O m a h a , the C i n c i n n a t i , the G r o t o n , t h e
Birmingham, the New York City, the Indi-
a n a p o l i s , the P h o e n i x , the B o s t o n , t h e
Baltimore, and the Atlanta) were stricken
between 1995 and 1999. The remainder
of the class is still active, deployed almost
evenly between the Atlantic and Pa c i f i c
ﬂeets.396 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S

[THE NETHERLANDS]—WA L R U S CLASS (1985)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

[The Netherlands]—Wa l r u s (28 October
1985), Zeeleeuw (20 June 1987), Dolﬁjn
(25 April 1990), Bruinvis (26 April 1992)
B u i l d e r : Rotterdamse
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2450 tons (surfaced),
2800 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 222900 x 28900 x 23900
M a c h i n e r y : 3 SEMT-Pielstick diesel en-
gines, 1 Holec electric motor, 1 shaft.
6300 bhp/6910 shp = 13/20 knots
R a n g e : 10,000 nm at 9 knots snorkeling
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 20 torpedoes or Sub-Harpoon
m i s s i l e s
C o m p l e m e n t : 52
N o t e s : The Nederlandsche Ve r e n i g d e
Scheepsbouw Bureaux developed this
class as an improved version of the
Z w a a r d v i s type. It introduced an X-tail for
greater maneuverability and higher ten-
sile steel hull construction for greater div-
ing depth. The sensor outﬁt introduced a
passive flank array and towed sonar.
These boats were equipped to launch
Sub-Harpoon missiles but The Nether-
lands has yet to procure those weapons.
This class is scheduled for an upgrade re-
fit beginning in 2009 that may include
the addition of an air- i n d e p e n d e n t
propulsion module.THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S 397

UNITED STATES: S E AW O L F CLASS (1995), S E AW O L F
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Seawolf (24 June 1995), C o n n e c t i c u t ( 1
September 1997), Jimmy Carter (13 May
2004)
B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 7467 tons (surfaced),
9137 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 353900 x 40900 x 35900
M a c h i n e r y : 1 S6W pressurized water
r e a c t o r, 2 steam turbines, 1 shaft pump
jet propulsor. 40,000 shp = 35 knots
submerged
A r m a m e n t : 8 x 26.50 torpedo tubes (bow),
total 50 torpedoes or antisubmarine
m i s s i l e s
C o m p l e m e n t : 134
N o t e s : The S e a w o l f class was the first
thoroughly new submarine design for the
U.S. Navy since the S k i p j a c k type. Its
characteristics were driven by the need to
counter fast Soviet submarines, using
high speed, powerful sensors, extreme
quietness, and a formidable battery of
weapons. These submarines generally are
accepted to be the quietest and fastest
deployed by the U.S. Navy and possibly
in the world. They have a six-surface tail
configuration and use a ducted shroud
propulsor.
The development of this class was ex-
tremely prolonged and marked by very
rapid and extensive cost escalation and
major political infighting. Originally
planned to form a class of 30 boats,
eventually only 2 attack boats and a398 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S

substantially different special mission
submarine, the Jimmy Carter, w e r e
ordered.
The Jimmy Carter was lengthened by
25 feet behind the sail to accommodate a
reconﬁgurable cargo space and command
c e n t e r. It carries equipment to launch
and interface with remotely operated ve-
hicles, an extensive array of advanced
communications devices, and can carry
up to 50 SEALS.

UNITED STATES: V I R G I N I A CLASS (2005)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Vi r g i n i a (16 August 2005), Te x a s (9 A p r i l
2006), H a w a i i (17 June 2006), N o r t h
Carolina (2006), New Hampshire (2010),
New Mexico (2010), 24 boats
B u i l d e r : Electric Boat and Newport News
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 7835 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 377900 x 34900 x 30960
M a c h i n e r y : 1 S9G pressurized water
r e a c t o r, 2 steam turbines, 1 shaft pump
jet propulsor. 23,000 shp = 25 knots
submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow),
12 x vertical launch missile tubes, total
37 torpedoes or antisubmarine missilesTHE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: YUGOSLAV I A 399

C o m p l e m e n t : 134
N o t e s : This class was designed to be a
slightly cheaper alternative to the Seawolf
type, whose cost overruns had caused
consternation within the navy and Con-
gress. Principal savings were expected to
arise from the greatest possible use of
0o f f - t h e - s h e l f0 electronics, but the type
still proved more expensive than the Sea-
wolf class. Congressional and naval con-
cern that the United States might soon
be reduced to a single yard capable of
constructing submarines led to the deci-
sion to build these boats at both the
Newport News and Electric Boat yards.
The Newport News facility builds the
stern, habitability and machinery spaces,
torpedo room, sail, and bow, while Elec-
tric Boat builds the engine room and con-
trol room. The two yards alternate work
on the reactor plant as well as the final
a s s e m b l y, test, outfit and delivery. Con-
tracts have been let for eight boats so far,
with orders anticipated for one additional
boat in 2007 and 2008, and ultimate
plans for building 24 submarines of this
type with delivery on an annual basis.

Y U G O S L AV I A
S U T J E S K A CLASS (1952)

Neretva (1958), Sutjeska (28 August 1958)
B u i l d e r : Pula
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 820 tons (surfaced), 945
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 196980 x 22900 x 15990
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Sulzer diesel engines, 2
electric motors, 2 shafts. 1800 bhp/
1200shp = 14/9 knots
R a n g e : 4800 nm at 8 knots surfaced
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes (4
bow, 2 stern), total 8 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 38
N o t e s : These indigenously designed boats
used Soviet weaponry and sensors. They
became training vessels in the early
1980s and were stricken in 1987.

H E R O J CLASS (1967)

Heroj (18 August 1967), Uskok (June 1970)
B u i l d e r : Pula
Junak (1968)
B u i l d e r : Split
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1170 tons (surfaced),
1350 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 210900 x 23980 x 16940
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Sulzer diesel engines, 2
electric motors, 1 shaft. 1600 bhp/1560
shp = 10/16 knots
R a n g e : 9700 nm at 8 knots snorkeling
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 10 torpedoes or 20 mines
C o m p l e m e n t : 55
N o t e s : This class was a more streamlined,
modestly enlarged version of the Sutjeska
type. They were laid up from 1993 be-
cause of a shortage of spare parts and
stricken by 2000.400 THE ADVENT OF TRUE SUBMARINES: YUGOSLAV I A

S AVA CLASS (1977)

Sava (1977), Drava (1981)
B u i l d e r : Split
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 830 tons (surfaced), 960
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 182970 x 23960 x 18970
M a c h i n e r y : 2 Sulzer diesel engines, 2
electric motors, 1 shaft. 1600 bhp/1560
shp = 10/16 knots
R a n g e : 9700 nm at 8 knots snorkeling
A r m a m e n t : 6 x 533mm torpedo tubes
(bow), total 10 torpedoes or 20 mines
C o m p l e m e n t : 27
N o t e s : These smaller boats incorporate
considerable automation to reduce the
size of their crews. Weaponry was possi-
bly of Swedish origin, while the Soviet
Union supplied the bulk of their sensors.
They were laid up from 1993 because of
a shortage of spare parts, and it is not
clear that they have become operational
since then.Strategic Missile
Submarines

C H I N A
PROJECT 092 ( N ATO XIA CLASS), 4 0 6 (1981)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

406 (30 April 1981)
B u i l d e r : Huludao
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 5500 tons (surfaced),
7000 tons (submerged)
Dimensions: 394900 x 33900 x 26900
M a c h i n e r y : 1 pressurized water cooled
reactor, 2 geared steam turbines, 1 shaft.
14,400 shp = 20 knots submerged

401402 S T R ATEGIC MISSILE SUBMARINES: CHINA

E n d u r a n c e : 80 days
A r m a m e n t : 12 x JL-1 ballistic missiles, 6
x 533mm torpedo tubes (bow), total 12
torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 100
N o t e s : The Project 092 uses the same
basic design as China’s Project 091 nu-
c l e a r-powered attack boat with a mis-
sile-launching section inserted abaft the
sail. Problems with the JL-1 missile’s
reliability delayed entry into service un-
til 1988. The 4 0 6 underwent a major
refit between 1995 and 1998 to accom-
modate JL-1A weapons with twice the
range of the earlier missiles. It has been
suggested that a second Project 092
submarine was built but lost as a result
of an accident in 1985, but no reliable
information exists on this topic.

PROJECT 094 (2004)

1 boat (2004)
B u i l d e r : Huludao
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 8000–9000 tons
(submerged)
Dimensions: N/A
M a c h i n e r y : N/A
E n d u r a n c e : N/A
A r m a m e n t : 16 x JL-2 ballistic missiles
N o t e s : Little reliable information exists
about China’s second-generation ballistic
missile submarines. They appear to be an
enlarged version of the original Project
092 armed with sixteen 5,000-mile range
JL-2 weapons with two to four MIRV
warheads. Their power plant is derived
from that of the Project 093 attack boats
with much improved reliability and quiet-
ing. Reports indicate that the first boat
was launched in July 2004 and that a to-
tal of three to four vessels are projected.S T R ATEGIC MISSLE SUBMARINES: FRANCE 403

F R A N C E
LE RÉDOUTA B L E CLASS (1967), L’ I N F L E X I B L E (1982)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Le Rédoutable (29 March 1967), Le Terrible
(12 December 1969), Le Fo u d r o y a n t ( 4
December 1971), L’Indomptable (17 Au-
gust 1974), Le To n n a n t (17 September
1977), L’Inﬂexible (23 June 1982)
B u i l d e r : Cherbourg
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 8045 tons (surfaced),
8940 tons (submerged)
Dimensions: 422900 x 35900 x 33900
M a c h i n e r y : 1 pressurized water cooled
r e a c t o r, 2 steam turbines, 2 turbo-alter-
nators, 1 electric motor, 1 shaft. 15,000
shp = 20/25 knots
A r m a m e n t : 16 x M-1 ballistic missiles, 4
x 550mm torpedo tubes (bow), total 18
torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 135
N o t e s : The French Navy had begun con-
struction of a nuclear-powered subma-
rine in 1956 but France’s inability at the
time to produce enriched uranium led to
the design of a heavy-water reactor that
was much too large for submarine use.
The French decision to separate itself
from the NATO command structure and
develop its own nuclear deterrent force
eliminated the possibility of assistance
or cooperation from the United States in
the process. Work recommenced on
the incomplete nuclear submarine hull,
which was transformed into a diesel-
powered trials boat for the French inde-
pendent ballistic missile system. The
Gymnôte commissioned in 1966, carrying404 S T R ATEGIC MISSILE SUBMARINES: FRANCE

a launching system for four missiles (one
quarter of the planned outﬁt of the oper-
ational boats), together with prototypes
of the guidance and inertial navigation
systems, and began full-scale trials of the
weapons package in late 1968.
Construction of the operational ballis-
tic missile submarines began before the
Gymnôte commissioned. Unlike all other
nations, Fr a n c e’s first nuclear powered
boats were its strategic missile sub-
marines. They were considerably larger
than the early American examples, pri-
marily because the M-1 missile they em-
barked was comparable in size and
weight to the Poseidon missile, although
its range was less, at 1600 miles, and it
could carry only a single warhead.
Because these boats were built over an
extended period, successive examples em-
bodied upgrades. Le Fo u d r o y a n t and L’I n-
d o m p t a b l e embarked the M-2 missile with
an increased range of 2000 miles. The ﬁ-
nal three boats have improved reactors
with metallic rather than oxide cores. L e
To n n a n t commissioned with the M-20
missile with a warhead of twice the yield
of the earlier weapons and the earlier
boats were upgraded to the same standard
from 1976. L’I n ﬂe x i b l e incorporated even
greater improvements with substantially
upgraded sonar and navigation systems, a
50-percent increase in diving depth, ma-
jor noise reduction measures, and the M-
4 missile with a 2150-mile range carrying
six independently targetable warheads. It
also was equipped to launch Exocet anti-
ship missiles.
Le Rédoutable decommissioned in
1991 (and became a museum ship at
Cherbourg in 200) but its four successors
were upgraded to a standard very close to
that of L’I n f l e x i b l e between 1985 and
1993. They decommissioned between
1996 and 2005, while L’I n f l e x i b l e i s
scheduled to decommission in 2008
(later if Le Terrible’s entry into service is
delayed).S T R ATEGIC MISSLE SUBMARINES: FRANCE 405

FRANCE: LE TRIOMPHANT CLASS (1994)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Le Tr i o m p h a n t (26 March 1994), L e
Téméraire (21 January 1998), Le Vigilant
(August 2003), Le Terrible (2008)
B u i l d e r : Cherbourg
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 12,640 tons (surfaced),
14,335 tons (submerged)
Dimensions: 453900 x 41900 x 41900
M a c h i n e r y : 1 pressurized water cooled
r e a c t o r, 2 steam turbines, 2 turbo-
alternators, 1 electric motor, 1 shaft pump
jet propulsor. 41,500 shp = 12/25 knots
E n d u r a n c e : 18 x M45 ballistic missiles,
4 x 533mm torpedo tubes (bow), total 18
torpedoes or antiship missiles
C o m p l e m e n t : 111
N o t e s : Initially there were to be ﬁve sub-
marines in this class but budget con-
straints led to the elimination of the ﬁnal
two boats. In 1996 President Jacques
Chirac reinstated the fourth boat. In ad-
dition to an additional pair of missile
launch tubes, this class incorporates ma-
jor advances in machinery arrangements,
automation (reducing the crew size sub-
stantially), search equipment, and navi-
gational systems. The hull dynamics are
optimized for low noise emission, the ma-
chinery is carried on a very elaborate raft
system to isolate it, there is a ducted
pump-jet propeller in place of a conven-
tional screw, and newly developed preci-
sion bearings replace even ball-bearings.
The first three boats launch the M-45
missile with a range of 3750 miles carry-
ing six warheads while Le Te r r i b l e w i l l
embark the new M-51 weapon with a
similar range but much upgraded war-
heads and accuracy.406 S T R ATEGIC MISSILE SUBMARINES: SOVIET UNION

SOVIET UNION
PROJECT AV611 [NATO ZULU V] (1956)

B - 6 7 (30 June 1956), B - 7 3 (30 November
1957), B - 7 8 (30 November 1957), B - 7 9
(4 December 1957)
B u i l d e r : Severodvinsk
B-89 (13 December1957)
B u i l d e r : Komsomolsk
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1890 tons (surfaced),
2450 tons (submerged)
Dimensions: 314940 x 24970 x 16990
M a c h i n e r y : 5 diesel engines, 3 electric
motors, 3 shafts. 6000 bhp/5400 shp =
16.5/12.5 knots
E n d u r a n c e : 58 days
A r m a m e n t : 2 x R-11FM ballistic missiles,
10 x 533mm torpedo tubes (6 bow, 4
stern)
C o m p l e m e n t : 83
N o t e s : The Project 611 submarine B - 6 2
was modiﬁed while under construction to
launch a single ballistic missile from a
vertical tube passing through the hull in
the aft end of the sail (Project 611A,
N ATO Zulu IV). It undertook extensive
launching trials from September 1955
and made its first submerged launch in
1959. The B-62 was converted to a sonar
trials vessel in 1966 and scrapped in
1980.
The production boats carried two ver-
tical missile-launching tubes. Their R-
11FM missiles had a range of 150 miles
with a single warhead. Almost immedi-
ately after completion they received addi-
tional diesel engines to improve their
performance, and they were modified
with the improve D-2 launch system.
Four operated with the Northern Fleet,
while the B-89 went to the Paciﬁc Fleet.
They undertook deterrent patrols until
withdrawn from service in the late 1980s.

PROJECT 659 [NATO ECHO I] (1959)

K-45 (12 May 1959), K-59, K-66 (1960), K-
122, K-259 (1961)
B u i l d e r : Komsomolsk
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 3770 tons (surfaced),
4980 tons (submerged)
Dimensions: 364990 x 30920 x 23930
M a c h i n e r y : 2 VM-A pressurized water
cooled reactors, 2 geared steam turbines,
2 shafts. 35,000 shp = 15/26 knots
E n d u r a n c e : 70 days
A r m a m e n t : 6 x P-5 cruise missiles, 4 x
533mm torpedo tubes (bow), 2 x 400mm
torpedo tubes (bow), 2 x 400mm torpedo
tubes (stern), total 4 plus 8 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 104
N o t e s : Project 659, the Soviet Union’s
second nuclear-powered submarine type,
reverted to a conventional hull form for
greater stability on the surface while ﬁr-
ing missiles. The missiles were carried in
three pairs of canisters, elevating to 15-
degrees for launch, built into the deck
casing abaft the sail. The boats entered
service in 1961 and operated extensively
in the North Atlantic and Pacific, al-
though they were withdrawn from the
land-attack role after 1965 and converted
to conventional torpedo attack boats. All
boats were withdrawn from service by
1990.S T R ATEGIC MISSLE SUBMARINES: SOVIET UNIION 407

SOVIET UNION: PROJECT 6 2 9 [ N ATO GOLF] (1959)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

K-36, K-72, K-79, K-83, K-88, K-91, K-93,
K - 9 6 , K - 1 0 2 , K - 1 0 7 , K - 1 1 0 , K - 1 1 3 , K -
118, K-142, K-153, K-167 (1959–1962)
B u i l d e r : Severodvinsk
K - 7 5 , K - 9 9 , K - 1 2 6 , K - 1 2 9 , K - 1 3 6 , K - 1 3 9 ,
K-163 (1959–1962)
B u i l d e r : Komsomolsk
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2850 tons (surfaced),
3610 tons (submerged)
Dimensions: 324930 x 269110 x 26970
M a c h i n e r y : 3 diesel engines, 3 electric
motors, 3 shafts. 6000 bhp/5400 shp =
14.5/12.5 knots
E n d u r a n c e : 70 days
A r m a m e n t : 3 x R-13 ballistic missiles, 6 x
533mm torpedo tubes (4 bow, 2 stern)
C o m p l e m e n t : 83
N o t e s : The design for this class was based
on the Project 641 (NATO Foxtrot) type,
with three vertical missile-launching
tubes passing through the hull at the aft
end of an extended sail. The first three
boats were commissioned with the earlier
R-11FM missile but later upgraded. The
R-13 weapon had a range of 375 miles
with a single warhead. From the outset
these boats were equipped with the D-2
launch system. Initially the majority of
the boats went to the Northern Fleet, but
by 1963 they were almost evenly divided
between the Northern and Paciﬁc ﬂeets.
Between 1963 and 1967 13 boats (the
K-72, the K-75, the K-79, the K-88, the
K - 9 3 , the K - 9 9 , the K - 1 1 0 , the K - 1 2 6 ,
the K-136, the K-139, the K-142, the K-
153, and the K-163) were modiﬁed with
the D-4 system to launch improved R-21
missiles with a range of 875 miles carry-
ing a single warhead.408 S T R ATEGIC MISSILE SUBMARINES: SOVIET UNION

In 1969 the K - 1 1 8 was modified for
trials launching the R-29 missile under
Project 601, and the K - 1 0 2 was con-
verted for trials of the R-27K missile un-
der Project 605. In 1976 the K - 1 5 3 w a s
converted as a trials launch platform for
the R-39 missile under Project 619. The
K - 6 1 , the K - 8 3 , and the K - 1 0 7 were con-
verted into command posts under Pro-
ject 629R in 1973. All missile and tor-
pedo tubes were removed, and additional
communications equipment and accom-
modations took their place. The K - 1 1 3
became a minelayer under Project 629E.
The K - 1 2 9 was lost on patrol in the
north Pacific after an internal explosion
on 8 March 1968. The K - 1 1 3 w a s
stricken in 1974; the K-36 and the K-91
were discarded in 1980; and the remain-
der of the class were scrapped between
1990 and 1992.

PROJECT 658 [NATO HOTEL] (1959)

K - 1 9 (8 August 1959), K - 3 3 (1960), K - 4 0 ,
K - 5 5 , K - 1 7 8 (1961), K - 1 6 , K - 1 4 5
(1962), K-149 Ukrainskiy Komsomolets
(1963)
B u i l d e r : Severodvinsk
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 4080 tons (surfaced),
5240 tons (submerged)
Dimensions: 3739110 x 30920 x 25930
M a c h i n e r y : 2 VM-A pressurized water
cooled reactors, 2 geared steam turbines,
2 shafts. 35,000 shp = 18/26 knots
E n d u r a n c e : 50 days
A r m a m e n t : 3 x R-13 ballistic missiles, 4 x
533mm torpedo tubes (bow), 4 x 400mm
torpedo tubes (2 bow, 2 stern)
C o m p l e m e n t : 104
N o t e s : The design for this class was based
on the Project 627 (NATO November)
nuclear-powered attack submarine with a
missile-launching compartment similar
to that of the Project 629 inserted aft of
the sail. Additional small diving planes
were fitted together with noise quieting
arrangements for all control surfaces.
The entire class except the K - 1 4 5 w a s
upgraded under Project 658M (NAT O
Hotel-II) between 1963 and 1967 with
the D-4 launch system, which could ﬁre
missiles while submerged. The K - 1 4 5
was modiﬁed in 1969 under Project 701
( N ATO Hotel-III) to launch R-29 mis-
siles with a range of 4875 miles carrying
a single warhead. Its length increased to
427 feet, with a surface displacement of
5500 tons and a submerged displacement
of 6400 tons. Speed underwater fell to 22
knots.
The K-55 and the K-178 went to the
Pacific Fleet, while all the other boats
served with the Northern Fleet. All mem-
bers of the class were decommissioned
between 1986 and 1991.S T R ATEGIC MISSLE SUBMARINES: SOVIET UNION 409

PROJECT 644 [NATO WHISKEY TWIN CYLINDER] (1960)

S-44, S-46, S-69, S-80, S-158, S-162
C o n v e r t e d : Gorkiy
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1055 tons (surfaced),
1350 tons (submerged)
Dimensions: 249920 x 20980 x 15910
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 4000 bhp/2700 shp =
18.25/13 knots
R a n g e : 22,000 nm at 9 knots surfaced, 443
nm at 2 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 2 x P-5 cruise missiles, 6 x
533mm torpedo tubes (4 bow, 2 stern),
total 12 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 52
N o t e s : The Project 613 boat S - 1 4 6 w a s
experimentally modiﬁed to launch a sin-
gle P-5 cruise missile in 1957. After suc-
cessful trials from 1957 to 1959, six
other Project 613 boats were converted
as operational launch platforms for the
weapon. Two cylindrical launchers were
built into the deck casing abaft the sail.
The submarine surfaced and elevated the
launchers to fire its missiles astern.
These boats were deployed in the Baltic
and withdrawn from service in the mid-
1960s.

PROJECT 665 [NATO WHISKEY LONG BIN] (1961)

S-61, S-64, S-142, S-152, S-155, S-164
C o n v e r t e d : Gorkiy and Baltic
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 1055 tons (surfaced),
1350 tons (submerged)
Dimensions: 249920 x 20980 x 15910
M a c h i n e r y : 2 diesel engines, 2 electric
motors, 2 shafts. 4000 bhp/2700 shp =
18.25/13 knots
R a n g e : 22,000 nm at 9 knots surfaced, 443
nm at 2 knots submerged
A r m a m e n t : 4 x P-5 cruise missiles, 6 x
533mm torpedo tubes (4 bow, 2 stern),
total 12 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 52
N o t e s : These boats featured four fixed
f o r w a r d - ﬁring missile launch tubes built
into the large bulbous sail at a 14-degree
elevation. They served in the Baltic until
the late 1960s.410 S T R ATEGIC MISSILE SUBMARINES: SOVIET UNION

PROJECT 667A [NATO YANKEE] (1966)

K-137 Leninets (28 August 1966), K - 1 4 0
(1966), K - 2 6 , K - 3 2 , K - 2 0 7 , K - 2 1 6
(1967), K - 2 1 0 , K - 2 4 9 , K - 2 5 3 , K - 3 9 5
O r e n b e r g , K - 4 0 8 (1968), K - 4 1 1 , K - 4 1 8 ,
K - 4 2 0 , K - 4 2 6 (1969), K - 2 1 4 , K - 2 1 9 , K -
2 4 1 , K - 2 4 5 , K - 4 0 3 , K-415, K - 4 2 3
(1970), K-228, K-444 (1971)
B u i l d e r : Severodvinsk
K-399 (1968), K-236, K-389, K-434 (1969),
K - 2 5 2 , K - 2 5 8 , K - 4 4 6 , K - 4 5 1 (1970), K -
430, K-436 (1971)
B u i l d e r : Komsomolsk
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 7760 tons (surfaced),
9600 tons (submerged)
Dimensions: 420900 x 38940 x 26900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 VM-2–4 pressurized water
cooled reactors, 2 geared steam turbines,
2 shafts. 52,000 shp = 15/28 knots
E n d u r a n c e : 70 days
A r m a m e n t : 16 x R-27 ballistic missiles,
4 x 533mm torpedo tubes, 2 x 400mm
torpedo tubes (all bow), total 12 plus
8 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 120
N o t e s : This class was the ﬁrst comparable
to U.S. ballistic missile submarines. The
D-5 system could launch the missiles in
salvoes of four weapons every 20 minutes
at a depth of up to 30 feet. The R-27
weapon had a range of 1500 miles carry-
ing a single warhead. The designers paid
considerable attention to obtaining high
speed underwater and to reducing noise
through the use of rubber and anechoic
tile coating and sound-absorbent ma-
chinery mounts. Beginning in 1972 the
class was upgraded under Project 667AU
to launch R-27U missiles (with a range of
1875 miles and multiple warheads).
The K - 1 4 0 was converted under Pro-
ject 667AM (NATO Yankee-II) in 1977 to
carry twelve R-31 solid-fuel missiles that
could launch much more quickly than
liquid-fueled weapons but had a range of
2250 miles carrying a single warhead,
about half that of the standard R-29
missile. The provisions of strategic arms
limitations treaties led to the removal of
ballistic missiles from the Project 667A
boats. The K-420 was converted in 1982
under Project 667M (NATO Yankee Side-
car) to carry 12 launchers for P-750
Grom (NATO SS-N-24 Scorpion) anti-
ship missiles. The length increased to
502 feet and the maximum beam to 49
feet. Seven boats (the K-236, the K-395,
the K-399, the K-408, the K-415, the K-
418, and the K-423) were converted be-
tween 1986 and 1991 under Project
6 6 7 AT (NATO Yankee Notch) to launch
32 RK-55 Granit (NATO SS-N-21 Samp-
son) land-attack cruise missiles via eight
horizontal tubes. The K - 4 0 3 was con-
verted to a special-purposes submarine
with large amounts of communications
and sensor equipment replacing the mis-
sile launchers, and the K - 4 1 1 became a
special operations submarine to launch
midget submarines.
These boats served with the Northern
Fleet. The K - 2 1 9 was scuttled at sea after
a major reactor accident in the Atlantic on
3 October 1986. Most of the class were
withdrawn from service by 1994, although
up to four may still be operational.S T R ATEGIC MISSLE SUBMARINES: SOVIET UNION 411

SOVIET UNION: PROJECT 667B [NATO DELTA-I] (1972)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

K - 2 7 9 (January 1972), K - 4 4 7 , K - 4 5 0
(1973), K-385, K-457, K-465 (1974), K-
460, K-472, K-475 (1975), K-171 (1976)
B u i l d e r : Severodvinsk
K-336, K-417 (1974), K-477, K-497 (1975),
K-500, K-512 50 Let VLKSM (1976), K-
523, K-530 (1977)
B u i l d e r : Komsomolsk
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 8900 tons (surfaced),
11,000 tons (submerged)
Dimensions: 456900 x 38940 x 27960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 VM-4B pressurized water
cooled reactors, 2 geared steam turbines,
2 shafts. 52,000 shp = 15/26 knots
E n d u r a n c e : 80 days
A r m a m e n t : 12 x R-29 ballistic missiles,
4 x 533mm torpedo tubes, 2 x 400mm
torpedo tubes (all bow), total 12 plus
6 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 120
N o t e s : These boats were designed to
launch the powerful R-29 missile with a
range of 4875 miles carrying a single
warhead, enabling them to operate with-
out exiting the Soviet bastion area. The
D-9 system could launch the entire mis-
sile load in a single salvo. The class
served with the Northern and Pa c i f i c
ﬂeets and was withdrawn from service by
1997.412 S T R ATEGIC MISSILE SUBMARINES: SOVIET UNION

PROJECT 667BD [NATO DELTA II] (1975)

K - 9 2 (January 1975), K-182 Shestidesy-
atiletie Velikogo Oktyabrya ( J a n u a r y
1975), K-193, K-421 (1975)
B u i l d e r : Severodvinsk
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 10,500 tons (surfaced),
13,000 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 506990 x 38940 x 28920
M a c h i n e r y : 2 VM-4B pressurized water
cooled reactors, 2 geared steam turbines,
2 shafts. 52,000 shp = 15/24 knots
E n d u r a n c e : 80 days
A r m a m e n t : 16 x R-29DD ballistic missiles,
4 x 533mm torpedo tubes, 2 x 400mm
torpedo tubes (all bow), total 12 plus 6
torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 135
N o t e s : These boats were an enlarged ver-
sion of the previous class to accommodate
four additional missiles. The upgraded R-
29DD missile had a range of 5700 miles.
All boats served with the Northern Fleet
and were withdrawn from service begin-
ning in 1996.

PROJECT 667BDR [NATO DELTA III] (1976)

K - 4 2 4 , K-441 26 Zvezda KPSS, K - 4 4 9
(1976), K-455, K-487, K-490 (1977), K-
44 Ryazan, K-496 (1978), K-211, K-223
Po d o l s k , K - 5 0 6 (1979), K - 1 8 0 , K - 4 3 3
Svyatoy Giorgiy Po b e d o n o s e t s (1980), K -
129 (December 1981)
B u i l d e r : Severodvinsk
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 10,600 tons (surfaced),
13,000 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 508960 x 38940 x 28960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 VM-4S pressurized water
cooled reactors, 2 geared steam turbines,
2 shafts. 60,000 shp = 14/24 knots
E n d u r a n c e : 80 days
A r m a m e n t : 16 x R-29R ballistic missiles, 4
x 533mm torpedo tubes, 2 x 400mm tor-
pedo tubes (all bow), total 12 plus 6 tor-
pedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 130
N o t e s : The principal change in this class
was the installation of the D-9R system
to launch R-29R missiles with a range of
up to 5000 miles with three to seven
multiple warheads. The class was divided
equally between the Northern and Paciﬁc
fleets. One submarine was decommis-
sioned in 1994 but the remainder may
still be operational.S T R ATEGIC MISSLE SUBMARINES: SOVIET UNION 413

PROJECT 667BDRM [NAT O D E LTA IV] (1985)

K-51 Ve r k h o t u y r e (January 1985), K - 8 4
Ye k a t e r i n b e r g (December 1985), K - 6 4
(December 1986), K-114 Tu l a ( S e p t e m-
ber 1987), K-117 Bryansk ( S e p t e m b e r
1988), K-18 Karelia (November 1989),
K-407 Novomoskovsk (January 1991)
B u i l d e r : Severodvinsk
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 11,740 tons (surfaced),
18,200 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 547990 x 39940 x 289100
M a c h i n e r y : 2 VM-4SG pressurized water
cooled reactors, 2 geared steam turbines,
2 shafts. 60,000 shp = 14/24 knots
E n d u r a n c e : 80 days
A r m a m e n t : 16 x R-29RM ballistic mis-
siles, 4 x 533mm torpedo tubes, 2 x
650mm torpedo tubes (all bow), total 12
torpedoes or missiles
C o m p l e m e n t : 135
N o t e s : This class was an enlargement of
the previous group to accommodate im-
proved communications and weapons
g e a r, including antiship missiles fired
through the torpedo tubes. The R-29RM
missiles have a range of 5200 miles with
four warheads. The designers paid even
more attention to noise reduction mea-
sures, including anechoic tile coating,
rafting machinery, and a precision five-
bladed propeller. Two additional boats
were canceled while under construction.
All these submarines joined the Northern
Fleet on completion and apparently re-
main in service.414 S T R ATEGIC MISSILE SUBMARINES: SOVIET UNION

SOVIET UNION: PROJECT 941 [NATO TYPHOON] (1980)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

TK-208 Dmitri Donskoy (23 September
1980), TK-202 (26 April 1982), T K - 1 2
S i m b i r s k (17 December 1983), T K - 1 3
A r k h a n g e l s k (21 February 1985), T K - 1 7
(August 1986), TK-20 Severstal ( J u l y
1988)
B u i l d e r : Severodvinsk
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 23,200 tons (surfaced),
48,000 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 564930 x 76910 x 36900
M a c h i n e r y : 2 OK-650 pressurized water
cooled reactors, 2 geared steam turbines,
2 shafts. 100,000 shp = 12/25 knots
E n d u r a n c e : 120 days
A r m a m e n t : 20 x R-39R ballistic missiles, 6
x 533mm torpedo tubes (bow), total 22
torpedoes or missiles
C o m p l e m e n t : 160
N o t e s : The submarines of this class are
the largest yet built anywhere in the
world. The design features two parallel -
full-length pressure hulls, a long missile
compartment between the hulls, an at-
tack center located beneath the sail, and
a forward torpedo room. Titanium is
used for the main structure, and the
external casing is steel. There are very
extensive sound reduction arrange-
ments; the vessels are designed to pene-
trate the Arctic ice; and they have small
maneuvering pods fore and aft. The R-
39R missiles have a range in excess of
5000 miles and can carry up to 10 war-
heads. A seventh member of the class
was not completed.
All boats entered the Northern Fleet
on completion. Two, the T K - 2 0 2 a n d
the T K - 1 7, were decommissioned in
1997 and have been dismantled. The
others remain available for service but
are slated to be scrapped in the near fu-
ture, since their missiles are no longer
in production.S T R ATEGIC MISSLE SUBMARINES: RUSSIA 415

R U S S I A
PROJECT 955 (2006)

Yuri Dolgorukiy (anticipated 2006), A l e k-
sander Nevsky (anticipated 2007)
B u i l d e r : Severodvinsk
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 14,720 tons (surfaced),
19,400 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 557990 x 44940 x 28960
M a c h i n e r y : 2 OK-650B pressurized water
cooled reactors, 2 geared steam turbines,
2 shafts. 96,000 shp = 15/29 knots
E n d u r a n c e : 100 days
A r m a m e n t : 12 x Bulava–30 ballistic mis-
siles, 4 x 533mm torpedo tubes (bow), to-
tal 12 torpedoes or missiles
C o m p l e m e n t : 130
N o t e s : This design reverted to smaller
dimensions. It originally was to carry
twenty improved R-39M Grom missiles,
but a series of total ﬂight failures led to
the weapon’s cancellation. The design
was recast to accommodate 12 solid-fuel
3M14 Bulava missiles, a naval adaptation
of the land-based Topol-M weapon, with
a range of up to 6250 miles carrying as
many as six warheads. This redesign sub-
stantially delayed progress on the new
class, the ﬁrst of which probably will not
be complete until 2007. The Russian
Navy apparently plans to commission
twelve of this class by 2021, with three in
service by 2010.416 S T R ATEGIC MISSILE SUBMARINES: UNITED KINGDOM

UNITED KINGDOM
R E S O L U T I O N CLASS (1966)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Resolution (15 September 1966), Repulse (4
November 1967)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
Renown (25 February 1967), R e v e n g e ( 1 5
March 1968)
B u i l d e r : Cammell Laird
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 7500 tons (surfaced),
8500 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 425900 x 33900 x 30900
M a c h i n e r y : 1 PWR1 pressurized water
cooled reactor, 2 steam turbines, 1 shaft.
15,000 shp = 20/25 knots
E n d u r a n c e : 16 x Polaris ballistic missiles,
6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow)
C o m p l e m e n t : 143
N o t e s : The design for the ﬁrst British bal-
listic missile submarines essentially
mated the forward and after sections of
the contemporary Va l i a n t class attack
submarine with the missile launch com-
partment and control spaces of the Amer-
ican L a f a y e t t e class, supplied by the
United States. Five boats were planned
but construction of the fifth submarine
was cancelled in 1964. From the outset
these boats embarked the Polaris A - 3
missile, which was upgraded in 1980
with an indigenously-developed triple in-
dependently targeted warhead as the
Polaris A-3TK. These submarines decom-
missioned between 1992 and 1996.S T R ATEGIC MISSLE SUBMARINES: UNITED KINGDOM 417

UNITED KINGDOM: VA N G U A R D CLASS (1992)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Vanguard (4 March 1992), Victorious ( 2 9
September 1993), Vi g i l a n t (14 October
1995), Vengeance (20 September 1998)
B u i l d e r : Barrow
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 14,000 tons (surfaced),
15,850 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 4919100 x 33900 x 33920
M a c h i n e r y : 1 PWR2 pressurized water
cooled reactor, 2 steam turbines, 1 shaft
pump jet propulsor. 27,500 shp = 18/25
knots
E n d u r a n c e : 16 x Trident ballistic missiles,
46 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow)
C o m p l e m e n t : 135
N o t e s : This class was a substantial enlarge-
ment of the previous design to accommo-
date the larger Trident missile and a more
powerful reactor. Very extensive measures
were incorporated into the design to mini-
mize noise emission while submerged.
The Trident D-5 missiles were supplied by
the United States under a modiﬁcation to
the existing Polaris sales agreement and
are maintained there. The warheads are
of British design, thereby eliminating
American control over their use.418 S T R ATEGIC MISSILE SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S

UNITED STAT E S
G R AY B A C K CLASS (1954), G R AY B A C K
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

G r a y b a c k (2 July 1954), Growler (5 A p r i l
1957)
B u i l d e r : Portsmouth
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 2287 (G r o w l e r— 2 1 7 4 )
tons (surfaced), 3638 (G r o w l e r— 3 3 8 7 )
tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 3 2 2940 (G r o w l e r— 3 1 7900) x
30900 x 17940
M a c h i n e r y : 3 FM diesel engines, 2 Elliott
electric motors, 2 shafts. 4500 bhp/5600
shp = 20/17 knots
A r m a m e n t : 4 x Regulus cruise missiles, 8 x
2 10torpedo tubes (6 bow, 2 stern), total
22 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 84
N o t e s : These boats were laid down as
members of the Darter class of attack
submarines but were cut in half and
lengthened on the slip to accommodate a
large forward hangar for Regulus missiles
and their ﬁre control spaces. They were
taken out of service as missile sub-
marines in May 1964. The Grayback was
converted to a transport submarine for
launching special forces between 1967
and 1969, decommissioned in 1975, and
stricken in 1984. A planned similar con-
version to the Growler was canceled, ap-
parently because of cost, and the boat
laid up until it too was decommissioned
in 1984.S T R ATEGIC MISSLE SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S 419

H A L I B U T (9 JANUARY 1959)

B u i l d e r : Mare Island
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 3846 tons (surfaced),
4995 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 350900 x 29960 x 20990
M a c h i n e r y : 1 S3W pressurized water re-
actor, 2 geared steam turbines, 2 shafts.
7300 shp = 20/20 knots
A r m a m e n t : 4 x Regulus cruise missiles, 6 x
210 torpedo tubes (4 bow, 2 stern), total
17 torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 125
N o t e s : The H a l i b u t used the same basic
design as the N a u t i l u s , with the sail
moved aft and a large cylindrical inclined
hangar incorporated into the bow in
place of the torpedo armament. The
hangar was designed to accommodate
four Regulus II missiles, but in practice
there was space for only two Regulus II
or five Regulus I weapons. The H a l i b u t
served with the Paciﬁc Fleet on deterrent
patrols until 1965. In 1968 it was con-
verted to operate as a special mission
submarine supporting saturation divers,
oceanographic research, and intelligence
operations until decommissioned in 1976
and stricken on 30 April 1986.420 S T R ATEGIC MISSILE SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S

UNITED STAT E S :
GEORGE WA S H I N G T O N CLASS (1959), GEORGE WA S H I N G T O N
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

George Wa s h i n g t o n (9 June 1959), Pa t r i c k
Henry (22 September 1959)
B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
Robert E. Lee
B u i l d e r : Newport News
Theodore Roosevelt
B u i l d e r : Mare Island
Abraham Lincoln
B u i l d e r : Portsmouth
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 5900 tons (surfaced),
6700 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 381980 x 33900 x 26980
M a c h i n e r y : 1 S5W pressurized water
cooled reactor, 2 geared steam turbines,
1 shaft. 15,000 shp = 16.5/22 knots
E n d u r a n c e : ?? days
A r m a m e n t : 16 x Polaris ballistic missiles,
6 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow), total 12
torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 136
N o t e s : The design for this class essentially
inserted a missile-launching compartment
into the hull of a S k i p j a c k-class attack
submarine. Nevertheless, contrary to
much popular belief, these boats were not
conversions but were laid down as ballistic
missile submarines, although their con-
struction was speeded by reallocating ma-
terials and machinery previously ordered
for other attack submarines. The entire
class commissioned within 15 months,
armed with the Polaris A-1 missile (range
of 1380 miles carrying a single warhead).
They were refitted to operate the im-
proved Polaris A-3 with an increased range
of 2900 miles and capable of carrying up
to three warheads. The Theodore Roosevelt
and the Abraham Lincoln d e c o m m i s-
sioned in 1981. The George Wa s h i n g t o n ,
the Patrick Henry, and the Robert E. Lee
had their missile-launching equipment re-
moved in the early 1980s and operated as
attack boats until they decommissioned
between 1983 and 1985.S T R ATEGIC MISSLE SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S 421

UNITED STAT E S : ETHAN ALLEN CLASS (1960), THOMAS A. EDISON ( 1 9 6 1 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Ethan A l l e n (22 November 1960), T h o m a s
A. Edison (15 June 1961)
B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
Sam Houston (2 February 1961), John Mar-
shall (15 July 1961), Thomas Jefferson (24
February 1962)
B u i l d e r : Newport News
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 6900 tons (surfaced),
7900 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 419950 x 33900 x 27960
M a c h i n e r y : 1 S5W pressurized water
cooled reactor, 2 geared steam turbines,
1 shaft. 15,000 shp = 16/21 knots
E n d u r a n c e : more than 70 days
A r m a m e n t : 16 x Polaris ballistic missiles,
4 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow), total 12
t o r p e d o e s
C o m p l e m e n t : 136
N o t e s : This class was a more sophisticated
redesign of the earlier type. They de-
ployed with the Polaris A-2 (range 1750
miles carrying a single warhead) and re-
fitted to launch the Polaris A-3. The
Ethan A l l e n , Thomas A. Edison, a n d
Thomas Je f f e r s o n decommissioned be-
tween 1983 and 1985, while the other
two boats were reclassed as attack sub-
marines and remained in service until
1991–1992.422 S T R ATEGIC MISSILE SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S

UNITED STAT E S : L A FAY E T T E CLASS (1962),
GEORGE WASHINGTON CARVER ( 1 9 6 5 )
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

Lafayette (8 May 1962), Alexander Hamilton
(18 August 1962), Nathan Hale (12 Janu-
ary 1963), Daniel We b s t e r (27 A p r i l
1963), Tecumsee (22 June 1963), Ulysses
S. Grant (2 November 1963), C a s i m i r
P u l a s k i (1 February 1964), B e n j a m i n
Fr a n k l i n (5 December 1964), G e o r g e
B a n c r o f t (5 December 1964), James K.
Po l k (22 May 1965), Henry L. Stimson
(13 November 1965), Francis Scott Key
(24 April 1966), Will Rodgers (21 July
1966)
B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
James Monroe (4 August 1962), Henry Clay
(30 November 1962), James Madison (15
March 1963), John C. Calhoun (22 June
1963), Von Steuben (18 October 1963),
Sam Rayburn (20 December 1963), S i-
mon Bolivar (22 August 1964), Lewis and
C l a r k (21 November 1964), George C.
M a r s h a l l (21 May 1965), George Wa s h-
ington Carver (14 August 1965)
B u i l d e r : Newport News
Andrew Ja c k s o n (15 September 1962),
Woodrow Wi l s o n (22 February 1963),
Daniel Boone (22 June 1963), Stonewall
Ja c k s o n (30 November 1963), K a m e-
h a m e h a (16 January 1965), Mariano G.
Vallejo (23 October 1965)
B u i l d e r : Mare Island
John A d a m s (12 January 1963), N a t h a n i e l
Greene (12 May 1964)
B u i l d e r : Portsmouth
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 7250 tons (surfaced),
8250 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 425900 x 33900 x 27990
M a c h i n e r y : 1 S5W pressurized water
cooled reactor, 2 geared steam turbines,
1 shaft. 15,000 shp = 16/21 knots
E n d u r a n c e : more than 70 daysS T R ATEGIC MISSLE SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S 423

A r m a m e n t : 16 x Polaris ballistic missiles,
4 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow), total 12
torpedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 136
N o t e s : This class represented a fully devel-
oped production version of the ﬁrst gener-
ation of U.S. ballistic missile submarines.
The ﬁrst eight boats commissioned with
the Polaris A2 missile, and all later vessels
in the class deployed initially with the Po-
laris A-3. Beginning in 1971, the entire
class was reﬁtted to launch the Po s e i d o n
C-3 with a range of 2900 miles, carrying
as many as 14 individually targeted war-
heads. The Nathan Hale was the ﬁrst of
the class to decommission, on 31 Decem-
ber 1986; the last to undertake a missile-
armed patrol was the Stonewall Ja c k s o n ,
which decommissioned on 9 Fe b r u a r y
1995. Four boats, the Sam Houston, t h e
John Marshall, the K a m e h a m e h a , and the
James K. Po l k , were converted into special
forces transport submarines, the last of
which, the K a m e h a m e h a , was stricken in
April 2002.

UNITED STATES: O H I O CLASS (1979), P E N N S Y LVANIA (1988)
(Courtesy of Art-Tech)

O h i o (7 April 1979), M i c h i g a n (26 A p r i l
1980), Florida (14 November 1981),
Georgia (6 November 1982), Henry M.
Jackson (15 October 1983), Alabama (19
May 1984), A l a s k a (12 January 1985),
N e v a d a (14 September 1985), Te n n e s s e e424 S T R ATEGIC MISSILE SUBMARINES: UNITED STAT E S

(13 February 1986), Pe n n s y l v a n i a ( 2 3
April 1988), West Vi r g i n i a (14 October
1989), K e n t u c k y (11 August 1990),
M a r y l a n d (10 August 1991), N e b r a s k a
(15 August 1992), Rhode Island (17 July
1993), M a i n e (16 July 1994), Wy o m i n g
(15 July 1995), Louisiana (27 July 1996)
B u i l d e r : Electric Boat
D i s p l a c e m e n t : 16,764 tons (surfaced),
18,750 tons (submerged)
D i m e n s i o n s : 560900 x 42900 x 36930
M a c h i n e r y : 1 S8G pressurized water
cooled reactor, 2 geared steam turbines,
1 shaft. 35,000 shp = 16/25 knots
E n d u r a n c e : 70 days
A r m a m e n t : 24 x Trident ballistic missiles,
4 x 210 torpedo tubes (bow), total 24 tor-
pedoes
C o m p l e m e n t : 165
N o t e s : This class was developed to take to
sea a new advanced ballistic missile that
materialized as the Trident. The new de-
sign incorporated much highly advanced
technology for quietness, a new very
powerful reactor, and a 50 percent in-
crease in the number of its missile load.
The result was the largest submarine in
the world until the advent of the Soviet
Project 941 in 1980. The ﬁrst eight boats
deployed with the Trident C-4 missile,
with a range of 4600 miles and carrying
up to eight warheads. The ﬁnal 10 vessels
took the Trident D-5 (range in excess of
4600 miles) to sea. The Ohio, the Michi-
gan, the Florida, and the Georgia decom-
missioned as ballistic missile submarines
between 2002 and 2004 and began con-
version to guided missile boats capable of
launching up to 154 Tomahawk cruise
missiles and deploying special forces, a
program slated to complete in 2006. The
Henry M. Ja c k s o n , the A l a b a m a , t h e
Alaska, and the Nevada began reﬁtting to
launch the Trident D-5 in 2001, complet-
ing the operation in 2006.G L O S S A R Y

Admiralty: Shorthand terminology for the Royal Navy’s Board of Admiralty,
which heads its central administration. Unlike most such boards, it in-
cludes both the civilian political appointees and the professional heads
of the ﬂeet.
Air Lock: A watertight compartment through which a diver may pass be-
tween a submarine and the sea, pausing within it while the air pressure
is equalized with the external environment.
Ballast Tank: A tank that may be ﬁlled or emptied of water to increase or
decrease a boat’s displacement.
Ballast Tank, Saddle: Ballast tank mounted outside the main structure of
the hull, named by analogy with saddlebags.
Bridge: The ship’s navigating and control station.
Bulge: Structures built onto a ship’s side beyond the primary hull structure.
Initially these were used to enhance protection against damage from a
torpedo hit but they came to be employed more to enhance stability by
increasing a hull’s internal volume.
C a s i n g : A light non-pressure-resistant structure designed to improve subma-
rine performance and/or enhance personnel access on the surface.
Catapult: A device for launching aircraft into the air.
Conseil Superieur: The French Navy’s professional leadership.
Conning Tower: Navigation station outside the main hull.
Convoy: A group of merchant vessels traveling together under escort.
Depth Charge: An explosive charge detonated at a preset depth.
Diving Planes: Horizontal control surfaces used to move a submarine in a
vertical plane.
Drop-Collar: A mechanical arrangement suspending a torpedo that may be
release remotely.
Dynamite Gun: A gun using compressed air as propellant for its missile,
which had a dynamite explosive charge.
General Board: The professional leadership of the United States Navy un-
til 1948.

425426 G L O S S A R Y

Horsepower
B r a ke Horsepower (bhp): The measure of the power output of internal
combustion engines.
Indicated horsepower (ihp): The measure of the power output of recipro-
cating steam engines.
Shaft Horsepower (shp): The measure of the power output of turbine en-
gines.

Machinery Types
Diesel: Internal combustion engines using oil fuel and compression
ignition.
Triple Expansion: Reciprocating steam engines using multiple cylinders to
maximize steam usage.
Turbine: Engines that use the passage of steam or hot gases to rotate en-
cased fan blade assemblies to generate power.

Magazine: Stowage space for munitions.
Mine: An underwater explosive charge.
M o n i t o r : A small shallow draft vessel carrying heavy guns, primarily in-
tended for shore bombardment.
Pressure Hull: The main body of a submarine that is reinforced to with-
stand water pressure.
Radar: Electronic location equipment, initially for search only but rapidly
developed to provide gunnery control and missile guidance.
Radome: A protective enclosure for a radar antenna.
Sail: Streamlined superstructure containing conning stations.
Sheer: The shape of the top of a ship’s hull as viewed from the side.
Sonar: Acoustic detection equipment for locating submarines.
Spar Torpedo: A warhead attached to a pole or spar, allowing it to project
ahead of the attacking vessel.
Submarine: A vessel that normally operates submerged. Usually also used
to describe any vessel that may operate underwater, even for a limited
period.
S u b m e r s i bl e : A vessel that normally operates on the surface but may be
submerged controllably at will.
Superstructure: All a ship’s structure above the hull’s sheer.
Topweight: The component of the ship’s weight that is above its center of
gravity.
Torpedo: Self propelled underwater weapon.
Torpedo, Acoustic: A torpedo that that is self-guided toward the sound of a
target’s propellers.
Torpedo, Homing: A torpedo that is self-guided to its target by emissions
(usually sonic).
Torpedo, Wire-guided: A torpedo guided to its target by an operator on the
launching vessel using signals transmitted through a trailing wire.G L O S S A R Y 427

Torpedo Pistol, Contact: Torpedo detonator that uses contact with its tar-
get for initiation.
Torpedo Pistol, Magnetic: Torpedo detonator that used its target’s mag-
netic ﬁeld for initiation.
Torpedo Tube: Tube for launching torpedoes, usually by the pressure of in-
troduced compressed air, a ram, or by allowing the torpedo to exit under
its own power (swim-out tube).
Trim Tank: Small tank used for ﬁne adjust of a submarine’s depth and in-
clination.
Variable Pitch Propeller: A propeller whose blades may be twisted to vary
their angle according to power needs.

Warship Types
B a t t l e c ru i s e r : A battleship type that trades armor protection for higher
speed.
Corvette: A small low-speed escort vessel.
Cruiser, Armored: A cruising warship type used until the ﬁrst quarter of
the 20th century that depended on an armored belt for its main protec-
tion.
Cruiser, Heavy: A cruiser armed with 8-inch guns.
Cruiser, Light: A cruiser armed with 6-inch or smaller guns.
Cruiser, Protected: A cruising warship type used until the ﬁrst quarter of
the 20th century that depended on an armored deck for its main
protection.
Destroyer: A relatively small, fast, multi-role warship, originally designed to
defend against torpedo boats but later also used for surface torpedo at-
tack and antiaircraft and antisubmarine defense.
Dreadnought: A battleship armed primarily with eight or more very large
caliber guns.
Escort Carrier: A small aircraft carrier primarily operating antisubmarine
aircraft.
Frigate: A more sophisticated development of a corvette.
Pre-Dreadnought: A battleship usually armed with four large caliber guns
and a substantial secondary armament.
Q-ship: A commissioned warship disguised as a merchant vessel carrying
concealed weapons used to attack submarines induced to surface.
Sloop: A sophisticated antisubmarine and antiaircraft escort vessel.
Torpedo Boat: A small fast vessel, originally for attack with torpedoes but
later often used as a fast antisubmarine vessel.B I B L I O G R A P H Y

Akermann, Paul, Encyclopaedia of British Submarines 1901-1955, Pe n-
zance: Periscope Publishing, 2002.
Alden, John D. The Fleet Submarine in the U.S. Navy: A Design and Con-
struction History. Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 1979.
A n t i e r, Jean-Jacques. L’ Aventure Heroïque des Sous-Marins Fr a n ç a i s
(1939–1945). Paris: Editions Maritimes and d’Outre-Mer, 1984.
Bagnasco, Erminio. I Sommergibili della Seconda Guerra Mondiale. Parma:
Ermanno Albertelli Editore, 1973.
B a k e r, A. D., III, ed. The Naval Institute Guide to Combat Fleets of the
Wo r l d . Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, various editions from 1976 to
date (editions from 2005 edited by Eric Wertheim).
Baker, A. D., III, ed. German Naval Vessels of World War Two: Compiled by
US Naval Intelligence. Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 1993.
Beloff, Max. The Foreign Policy of Soviet Russia, 1929–1941. London: Ox-
ford University Press, 1949.
Berman, Robert P., and John C. Baker. Soviet Strategic Forces: Require-
ments and Responses. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 1982.
Bethge, Hans-Georg. Die B r a n d t a u c h e r : Ein Ta u c h b o o t - Von der Idee zur
Wirklichkeit. Rostock: Hinstorff Verlag, 1968.
B l a i r, Clay. Silent Victory: The U.S. Submarine War Against Ja p a n . N e w
York: Bantam Books, 1976.
Blair, Clay. Hitler’s U-Boat War: The Hunters, 1939–1942. New York: Ran-
dom House, 1996.
Blair, Clay. Hitler’s U-Boat War: The Hunted, 1942–1945. New York: Ran-
dom House, 1998.
Blechman, Barry M., and Stephen S. Kaplan, eds. Force without War: US
Armed Forces as a Political Instrument. Washington, DC: Brookings In-
stitution, 1978.
Boyd, Carl and Akahiko Yoshida, The Japanese Submarine Force in Wo r l d
War II, Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 1995.
Breyer, Siegfried, and Norman Polmar. Guide to the Soviet Navy. Annapolis:
Naval Institute Press, various editions from 1970 to 1991 (later editions
Norman Polmar only).

429430 B I B L I O G R A P H Y

Brown, David K., ed. Conway’s History of the Ship: The Eclipse of the Big
Gun: The Warship 1906–45. Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 1992.
Brown, David K., ed. The Grand Fleet: Warship Design and Development
1906–1922. Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 1999.
Brown, David K., ed. Nelson to Vanguard: Warship Design and Development
1923–1945. Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 2000.
Brown, David K., and George Moore, Rebuilding the Royal Navy: Warship
Design since 1945. Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 2003.
Busch, Harald. U-Boats at War. New York: Ballantine Books, 1955.
Cable, James. Gunboat Diplomacy: Political Uses of Limited Force. London:
Macmillan, 1981.
Cable, James. B r i t a i n ’s Naval Future. Annapolis: Naval Institute Press,
1983.
Cable, James. Navies in a Violent Peace. London: Macmillan, 1989.
Carpenter, Dorr, and Norman Polmar. Submarines of the Imperial Japanese
Navy. Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 1986.
Cocchia, Aldo. The Hunters and the Hunted. Annapolis: Naval Institute
Press, 1958.
Compton-Hall, Richard. Submarine Warfare—Monsters & Midgets. Po o l e :
Blandford Press, 1985.
Compton-Hall, Richard. Sub vs. Sub: The Tactics and Technology of Under-
sea Warfare. New York: Orion Books, 1988.
Cowie, J. S. Mines, Minelayers and Minelaying. London: Oxford University
Press, 1949.
Daniel, Donald C. Anti-Submarine Warfare and Superpower Strategic Sta-
bility. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1986.
Dönitz, Karl. Memoirs: Ten Years and Twenty Days. Cleveland: World Pub-
lishing, 1957.
Dull, Paul S. A Battle History of the Imperial Japanese Navy (1941–1945).
Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 1978.
Evans, David C. The Japanese Navy in World War in the Words of Former
Japanese Naval Ofﬁcers. Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 1982.
Evans, David C., and Mark R. Peattie. Kaigun: Strategy, Tactics, and Tech-
nology in the Imperial Japanese Navy, 1887–1941. Annapolis: Naval In-
stitute Press, 1997.
Everitt, Don. K Boats: Steam-Powered Submarines in World War I, London:
George C. Harrap and Company, 1963.
Fayle, C. Ernest. Ofﬁcial History of the Great War: Seaborne Trade. 3 vols.
plus map vol. London: John Murray, 1920–1924.
Field, Cyril. The Story of the Submarine from the Earliest Ages to the Present
Day. London: Low, Marston and Company, 1908.
Friedman, Norman. U.S. Naval Weapons: Every Gun, Missile, Mine and Tor-
pedo Used by the U.S. Navy from 1883 to the Present Day. A n n a p o l i s :
Naval Institute Press, 1982.B I B L I O G R A P H Y 431

Friedman, Norman. Submarine Design and Development. Annapolis: Naval
Institute Press, 1984.
Friedman, Norman, ed. U.S. Army-Navy Journal of Recognition, September
1 9 4 3 – February 1944, Numbers 1–6. Annapolis: Naval Institute Press,
1990.
Friedman, Norman, ed. Conway’s History of the Ship: Navies in the Nuclear
Age. Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 1993.
Friedman, Norman. U.S. Submarines Since 1945: An Illustrated Design His-
tory. Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 1994.
Friedman, Norman. U.S. Submarines Through 1945: An Illustrated Design
History. Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 1998.
Fukui Shizuo. Nihon no gunkan: waga gijutsu no hattatsu to kantei no
hensen [Japanese Warships: Our Development of Ship Construction Tech-
nology and Changes over Time]. Tokyo: Shuppan Kyodosha, 1959.
Fukui Shizuo. Japanese Naval Vessels at the End of the War. Old Greenwich,
CT: We, 1970.
Fukui Shizuo. Shashin Nihon kaigun zen kantei shi [A Photographic History
of All the Ships in the Japanese Navy]. 3 vols. Tokyo: Best Sellers, 1994.
Gardiner, Robert, ed. Conway’s All the World’s Fighting Ships, 1922–1946.
London: Conway Maritime Press, 1980.
Gardiner, Robert, ed. Conway’s All the World’s Fighting Ships, 1906–1921.
London: Conway Maritime Press, 1985.
Gardiner, Robert, ed. Conway’s All the World’s Fighting Ships, 1947–1995.
London: Conway Maritime Press, 1995.
Garier, Gerard. L’Odyssée Technique et Humaine du Sous-Marin en France.
4 vols. Bourg en Bresse: Marines Editions, 1998–2004.
Gibson, R. H., and Maurice Prendergast. The German Submarine Wa r
1914–1918. London: Constable and Company, 1931.
Grant, Robert M. U-Boat Intelligence: Admiralty Intelligence Division and the
Defeat of the U-Boats, 1914-1918, Penzance: Periscope Publishing, 2002.
Grant, Robert M. U-Boats Destroyed: The Effect of Antisubmarine Warfare,
1914-1918, Penzance: Periscope Publishing, 2002.
Grant, Robert M. U-Boat Hunters: Code Breakers, Divers and the Defeat of
the U-Boats, 1914-1918, Penzance: Periscope Publishing, 2003.
Gray, Edwyn. The Devil’s Device: Robert Whitehead and the History of the
Torpedo. Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 1991.
Gray, Edwyn. 19th Century Torpedoes and Their Inventors. Annapolis: Naval
Institute Press, 2004.
Greger, Réné. The Russian Fleet 1914–1917. London: Ian Allan, 1972.
G r ö n e r, Erich, Dieter Jung, and Martin Maass. German Wa r s h i p s
1815–1945. Vol.II: U-Boats and Mine Warfare Vessels. Annapolis: Naval
Institute Press, 1991.
Grove, Eric. Vanguard to Trident: British Naval Policy since World War II.
Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 1987.432 B I B L I O G R A P H Y

Hackmann, Willem. Seek & Strike: Sonar, Anti-Submarine Warfare and the
Royal Navy. London: HMSO, 1984.
Halpern, Paul G. The Naval War in the Mediterranean, 1914–1918. A n-
napolis: Naval Institute Press, 1987.
Hargis, Robert, US Submarine Crewman 1941-1945, Oxford: Osprey Pub-
lishing, 2003.
Hashimoto, Mochitsura. Sunk! New York: Henry Holt and Company, 1954.
Herrick, Robert Waring. Soviet Naval Strategy: Fifty Years of Theory and
Practice. Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 1968.
Herrick, Robert Waring. Soviet Naval Theory and Policy: Gorshkov’s Inheri-
tance. Newport, RI: Naval War College, 1988.
Holmes, W. J. Undersea Victory: The Inﬂuence of Submarine Operations on
the War in the Paciﬁc. Garden City, NJ: Doubleday and Company, 1966.
Holmes, W. J. Double-Edged Secrets. Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press,
1979.
Hool, Jack and Keith Nutter, Damned Un-English Machines: A History of
Barrow-Built Submarines, Stroud: Tempus Publishing, 2003.
Hovgaard, William. Modern History of Wa r s h i p s . London: E. and F. N.
Spon, 1920.
Huan, Claude. Les Sous-Marins Français 1918–1945. Bourg en Bresse:
Marines Editions, 2004.
Hurd, Archibald. History of the Great War: The Merchant Navy. 3 vols. Lon-
don: John Murray, 1921–1927.
Huwart, Olivier. Sous-Marins Francais, 1944–1954: La Décennie de Renou-
veau. Bourg en Bresse: Marines Editions, 2003.
Ienaga, Saburo. The Paciﬁc War, 1931–1945. New York: Pantheon Books,
1978.
Ireland, Bernard. Warships of the World: Major Classes. New York: Charles
Scribner’s Sons, 1976.
Ito, Masanori, with Roger Pineau. The End of the Imperial Japanese Navy.
New York: W. W. Norton and Company, 1956.
Jane, Fred T. The Imperial Russian Navy: Its Past, Present and Future. Lon-
don: W. Thacke, 1904.
Jentschura, HansGeorg, Dieter Jung, and Peter Mickel. Warships of the Im-
perial Japanese Navy 1869–1945. Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 1977.
Jordan, John. Soviet Submarines, 1945 to the Present. London: Arms and
Armour Press, 1989.
Kaplan, Stephen S., ed. Diplomacy of Power: Soviet Armed Forces as a Polit-
ical Instrument. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 1981.
Kaufman, R. G. Arms Control during the Pre-Nuclear Era: The United
States and Naval Limitations between the Two World Wars. New York: Co-
lumbia University Press, 1990.
Kemp, Paul. The Russian Convoys 1941–45. London: Arms and A r m o r
Press, 1987.
Kemp, Paul. Malta Convoys 1940–43. London: Arms and Armor, 1988.B I B L I O G R A P H Y 433

Kohl, Fritz and Eberhard Rössler, The Type XXI U-Boat, London: Conway
Maritime Press, 2002.
König, Paul. The Voyage of the Deutschland. New York: Hearst Interna-
tional Library, 1916.
Konstam, Angus, Confederate Submarines and Torpedo Vessels 1861-1865,
Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 2004.
Korzh, Vi k t o r, Red Star under the Baltic: A Firsthand Account of Life on
Board a Soviet Submarine in World War 2. London: Pen & Sword, 2005.
Krause, Guenther. U-Boot und U-Ja g d . East Berlin: Military Publishing
House, 1984.
Kruska, Emil and Eberhard Rössler, Walter U-Boote, Munich, J.F.
Lehmanns Verlag, 1969.
Labayle-Couhat, Jean. French Warships of World War II. London: Ian Allan,
1971.
Labayle-Couhat, Jean. French Warships of World War I. London: Ian Allan,
1972.
Lake, Simon. The Submarine in War and Peace: Its Development and Its
Possibilities. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1918.
Lake, Simon. Submarine: The Autobiography of Simon Lake. New York: D.
Appleton-Century Books, 1939.
Lambert, John, and David Hill. The Submarine Alliance. London: Conway
Maritime Press, 1986.
Largess, Robert P., and James L. Mandelbaum. Albacore: Forerunner of the
Future. Portsmouth, NH: Portsmouth Marine Society, 1999.
Leary, William M. Under Ice: Waldo Lyon and the Development of the Arctic
Submarine. College Station: Texas A&M University Press, 1999.
Lehman, John F. Command of the Seas: Building the 600 Ship Navy. New
York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, Macmillan, 1988.
Le Masson, Henri. The French Navy. Vol. II. Garden City, NJ: Doubleday,
1969.
Le Masson, Henri. Du Nautilus (1800) au Rédoutable. Paris: Presses de la
Cité, 1969.
Lenton, Henry T. German Submarines. Garden City, NJ: Doubleday, 1967.
Lenton Henry T., British Submarines. Garden City: Doubleday, 1972.
Lenton Henry T., American Submarines. Garden City: Doubleday, 1973.
Lenton Henry T., German Warships of the Second World War. London: Mac-
donald & Janes, 1975.
Lenton Henry T. & J.J. Colledge, [British & Commonwealth] Warships of
World War II. London: Ian Allan, 1973.
Louzeau, B. Les Sous-Marins Français: Les Bateaux Noirs Paris: Editions
Etai, 1999.
MacConnell, James, and Bradford Dismukes, eds. Soviet Naval Diplomacy.
New York: Pergamon Press, 1979.
Marston, Daniel, ed. The Paciﬁc War Companion: From Pearl Harbor to Hi-
roshima. London: Osprey Publishing, 2005.434 B I B L I O G R A P H Y

McGwire, Michael, and John MacDonnell, eds. Soviet Naval Inﬂuence: Do-
mestic and Foreign Dimensions. New York: Praeger, 1977.
Meister, Jürg. Soviet Warships of the Second World War. London: Macdon-
ald and Janes, 1977.
Merrill, John, and Lionel D. Wyld. Meeting the Submarine Challenge: A
Short History of the Naval Underwater Systems Center. Washington, DC:
Government Printing Ofﬁce, 1997.
Messimer, Dwight D. The Merchant U-Boat. Annapolis, MD: Naval Insti-
tute Press, 1988.
M e s s i m e r, Dwight D. Find and Destroy: Antisubmarine Warfare in Wo r l d
War I. Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 2001.
M e s s i m e r, Dwight D. Verschollen: World War I U-Boat Losses. A n n a p o l i s ,
MD: Naval Institute Press, 2002.
M i l l e r, David. U-Boats: The Illustrated History of the Raiders of the Deep.
Washington, DC: Brassey’s, 2000.
M o l l e r, Eberhard, and Werner Brack. The Encyclopedia of U-Boats from
1904 to the Present. London: Greenhill Books, 2004.
Moore, John E. Warships of the Royal Navy. Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute
Press, 1979.
Naval Historical Center. Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships. 9
vols. Washington, DC: Government Printing Ofﬁce, 1954–1991.
Niestlé, Axel, German U-Boat Losses During World War II: Details of De-
struction, London: Greenhill Books, 1998.
O’Connor, Raymond. Perilous Equilibrium: The United States and the Lon-
don Naval Conference of 1930. Lawrence: University of Kansas Press,
1962.
Orita, Zenji, with Joseph D. Harrington. I-Boat Captain. Canoga Park, CA:
Major Books, 1976.
Paterson, Lawrence. U-Boat War Patrol: The Hidden Photographic Diary of
U-564. London: Greenhill, 2004.
Paterson, Lawrence. H i t l e r ’s Grey Wolves: U-Boats in the Indian Ocean.
London: Greenhill Books, 2004.
Pavlov, A. S. Warships of the USSR and Russia, 1945–1995. Annapolis, MD:
Naval Institute Press, 1997.
Pollina, Paolo M., and Marcello Bertini. I Sommergibili Italiani
1895–1971. Rome: Ufﬁcio Storico Marina Militare, 1971.
Po l m a r, Norman. Atomic Submarines. Princeton, NJ: D. Van Nostrand,
1963.
Polmar, Norman. The Naval Institute Guide to the Ships and Aircraft of the
U.S. Fleet, 12th–18th Editions. Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press,
1981–2005.
Polmar, Norman. The Death of the USS Thresher. New York: Lyons, 2001.
Polmar, Norman, and Thomas B. Allen. Rickover: Controversy and Genius.
New York: Random House, 1982.B I B L I O G R A P H Y 435

Polmar, Norman, and Jurrien Noot. Submarines of the Russian and Soviet
Navies, 1718–1990. Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1991.
Polmar, Norman, and K. J. Moore. Cold War Submarines: The Design and
Construction of U.S. and Soviet Submarines. Washington, DC: Brassey’s,
2004.
Ring, Jim. We Come Unseen: The Untold Story of Britain’s Cold War Sub-
marines. London: John Murray, 2001.
Robertson, Terence. The Golden Horseshoe: The Wartime Career of Otto
Kretschmer, U-Boat Ace. London: Greenhill Books, 2006.
Rohwer, Jürgen, Allied Submarine Attacks of World War II: European The-
atre of Operations, 1939-1945, London: Greenhill Books, 1997.
Rohwer, Jürgen. Axis Submarine Successes of World War Two: German, Ital-
ian and Japanese Submarine Successes, 1939–1945. London: Greenhill
Books, 1999.
Roland, Alex. Underwater Warfare in the Age of Sail. Bloomington: Univer-
sity of Indiana Press, 1978.
Roskill, Stephen W. The War at Sea, 1939–1945. 3 vols. in 4. London: Her
Majesty’s Stationery Ofﬁce, 1956–1961.
Roskill, Stephen W. Naval Policy between the Wars. 2 vols. in 1. New York:
Walker, 1968.
Rössler, Eberhard. The U-Boat: The Evolution and Technical History of Ger-
man Submarines. Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1981.
Rössler, Eberhard. Die Torpedos der Deutschen U-Boote. Herford: Koehlers
Verlagsgesellchaft, 1984.
R ö s s l e r, Eberhard. Die Unterseebootee der Kaiserlichen Marine, M u n i c h :
Bernard & Graefe, 1997.
Ruge, Friedrich. Der Seekrieg: The German Navy’s Story 1939–1945. A n-
napolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1957.
Sapolsky, Harvey M. The Polaris System Development. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1972.
Showell, Jak P. Mallmann. U-Boats under the Swastika. London: Ian Allen,
1973.
Silverstone, Paul H. U.S. Warships of World War II. London: Ian A l l a n ,
1965.
Silverstone, Paul H. U.S. Warships of World War I. London: Ian A l l a n ,
1970.
Silverstone, Paul H. U.S. Warships since 1945. Annapolis, MD: Naval Insti-
tute Press, 1987.
Sleeman, C. W. Torpedoes and Torpedo Warfare: Containing a Complete and
Concise Account of the Rise and Progress of Submarine Warfare also a De-
tailed Description of All Matters Appertaining Thereto, including the Lat-
est Improvements. Portsmouth, NH: Grifﬁn and Co., 1880.
Smith, Gaddis. Britain’s Clandestine Submarines, 1914–1915. New Haven:
Yale University Press, 1964.436 B I B L I O G R A P H Y

Society of Naval Architects of Japan. Plans of Ships of the Imperial Japanese
Navy: History of Shipbuilding in the Showa Era. Tokyo: Hara Shobo
Company, 1975.
Spinardi, Graham. From Polaris to Trident: The Development of US Fleet
Ballistic Missile Te c h n o l o g y. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1994.
Stefanick, Tom. Strategic Antisubmarine Warfare and Naval Strategy. L e x-
ington, MA: D.C. Heath, 1987.
Stumpf, David K. Regulus: The Forgotten We a p o n . Paducah, KY: Tu r n e r
Publishing, 1996.
Tomitch, V. M. Warships of the Imperial Russian Navy. San Francisco: B. T.
Publishers, 1968.
Treadwell, Terry C. Submarines with Wings: The Past, Present and Future of
Aircraft-Carrying Submarines. London: Conway Maritime Press, 1985.
Tritten, James John. Soviet Naval Forces and Nuclear Warfare. Boulder, CO:
Westview Press, 1986.
U.S. Navy. Historic Ship Exhibits in the United States. Washington, DC:
Government Printing Ofﬁce, 1969.
U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey. The Campaigns of the Paciﬁc War. Washing-
ton, DC: Government Printing Ofﬁce, 1946.
Vego, Milan. The Soviet Navy To d a y. London: Arms and Armour Press,
1986.
Watson, Bruce W. Red Navy at Sea: Soviet Naval Operations on the High
Seas, 1956–1980. Boulder, CO: Westview, 1982.
Watson, Bruce W., and Peter M. Dunn, eds. The Future of the Soviet Navy.
Boulder, CO: Westview, 1986.
Watts, A. J., and B. G. Gordon. The Imperial Japanese Navy. London: Mac-
donald, 1971.
We i r, Gary E. Forged in Wa r. Washington, DC: Naval Historical Center,
1993.
White, John F. U-Boat Tankers 1941–1945: Submarine Suppliers to Atlantic
Wolf Packs. Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1998.
Williamson, Gordon, Grey Wolf: U-Boat Crewman of World War II, Oxford:
Osprey Publishing, 2001.
Wilson, Michael. Baltic Assignment: British Submarines in Russia,
1914–1919. London: Leo Cooper, 1985.
Wynn, Kenneth. U-Boat Operations of the Second World War. 2 vols. Lon-
don: Chatham Publishing, 1997.B I B L I O G R A P H Y 437

W E B S I T E S

BritSub: www.britsub.net
Dutch Submarines: www.dutchsubmarines.com
Federation of American Scientists: www.fas.org
(French Submarines) Sous-Marins Français:
http://perso.orange.fr/sous-marin.france
GlobalSecurity.org: www.globalsecurity.org/military/index.html
Haze Gray & Under Way (U.S. Navy Submarines): www.hazegray.org
Imperial Japanese Navy Page: www.combinedﬂeet.com/kaigun.htm
Israeli Submarines: www.dolphin.org.il
The Italian Navy’s ofﬁcial site:
www.marina.difesa.it/sommergibili/index.htm
Italian submarines in World War II:
www.regiamarina.net/subs/index.htm
Italian submarines from World War II to the present:
www.sommergibili.com/indexen.htm
Jan-Erik Thoft’s Submarines (Swedish Submarines): www.submarines.nu
John Philip Holland and His Submarines: http://www.geocities.com/
Pentagon/Barracks/1401/index.html
Naval Historical Center: www.history.navy.mil
Norwegian Submarine History: http://home.c2i.net/geisaksen/history.htm
Simon Lake Website: www.simonlake.com
Spanish Submarine Navy history: www.submarinos.net
Submarine Heritage Center, Barrow-in-Furness:
www.submarineheritage.com
Submariners Association, Barrow-in-Furness: www.submariners.co.uk
Turkish Submarine History:
http://geocities.com/Pentagon/Bunker/7704/battle.html
Ubåtsvapnet 100 År (Swedish Submarines): www.ubatsvapnet100.com
U-Boat Net: www.uboat.net
Unterseeboote der Kaiserlichen Marine (Austro-Hungarian Submarines):
www.u-boot-net.deI N D E X

A class submarines (British), 42
Abdul Hamid (submarine), 9
Aboukir (armored crusier), 14–15
Afghanistan, missile launch against, 51
Ahead-throwing weapons, 37
Aigrette (submarine), 9
Aircraft carriers, 1
Air-independent propulsion (AIP), 44–46
Airlocks, 3, 8
Akula class submarines, 49
Albacore (experimental submarine), 41, 48
Aleksandrovskiy, Ivan Fedorovich, 2–3
Alfa class submarines, 48
Allied antisubmarine operations
in World War I, 13–14, 16
in World War II, 27, 37
Allied submarine operations
in World War I, 11–14
in World War II, 31–34
Alligator (submarine), 4, 6
Amalﬁ (armored cruiser), 20
American Submarine Company, 5
Amphion class (“A” type) submarines, 42
Antiaircraft guns, 23, 26, 37
Antiship cruise missiles, 42
Antisubmarine operations, 50
Allies in WWI, 13–14, 16
Allies in WWII, 27, 37
Axis in WWII, 33
hunter-killer tactics, 40, 48, 50
technology and countermeasures, 37, 40
Arabic (liner), 16
Argonaut I & II (submarines), 8
Armaments
acoustic torpedoes, 37
ahead-throwing weapons, 37
antiaircraft guns, 23, 26, 37
antiescort homing torpedoes, 38
antiship cruise missiles, 42
ballistic missiles, 53–61
D-4 launch system, 56
deck guns, 23, 25–26
drop-collar torpedo launch system, 3
dynamite gun, 6
JL-1 ballistic missiles, 59
JL-2 ballistic missiles, 59
Jupiter missiles, 56
land-attack cruise missiles, 54
liquid-fueled missiles, 56
Loon missiles, 54
M1 ballistic missile system, 58
M4 ballistic missiles, 58
MIRVs, 56, 58, 59
P-20 missiles, 55
Polaris ballistic missiles, 54, 56, 57
Poseidon missiles, 56
R-1 ballistic missiles, 54
R-11 ballistic missiles (Scuds), 55
R-13 ballistic missiles, 55
R-21 ballistic missiles (Sarks), 56
R-39 ballistic missiles (Sturgeons), 57
Regulus nuclear cruise missile, 54, 59
reload tubes, 23
rocket missiles, 1–2

439440 I N D E X

self-propelled torpedoes, 3, 9
solid-fueled missiles, 56, 57, 59
submarine-launched cruise missiles,
50–51
torpedo problems, WWII, 38
torpedo tubes, 23
Trident missiles, 57, 58
wakeless electronic torpedoes, 38
Athena (liner), 35
Austrian submarines, 19–21
Axis antisubmarine operations, 33
Axis submarine operations, 34–38
B-62 (submarine), 55
B-67 (submarine), 55
Baker, George C., 7
Balao class submarines, 25, 41
Ballistic missile submarines, 48–61
Barbarossa (battleship), 13
Barbel class submarines, 41
Barbero (submarine), 54
Barracuda class submarines, 49
Bars class submarines, 3
“Bastion defense,” 52, 61
Batteries, 7, 8, 43
Bauer, Wilhelm, ix, 2
Berling, Gustave, 10
Blue and Gold crews, 59
Bourgeois, Siméon, 8
Brandtaucher (submarine), 2
British submarines
8th (Overseas) Submarine Flotilla, 11
antisubmarine operations, WWI, 13–14,
16
antisubmarine vessels, 10, 28
assault on the Dardanelles, 13
campaign against merchant shipping in
WWII, 32–33
in the Cold War, 42–43, 45
crewing system, 61
distant blockade, WWI, 14
early models, 9–10
ﬂeet submarines, 10
inﬂuences on later Soviet designs, 30
midget submarines, 28
minelaying submarines, 28
nuclear-powered submarines, 42–43, 49
radar and, 33
signals intelligence, 33
strategic missile submarines, 57–58
Walter closed-cycle turbine system, 42
in World War I, 9–12
in World War II, 27–28, 31–33
Brun, Charles, 8
Bubnov, Ivan Grigorevich, 3, 30
Bushnell, David, 3–4
Canadian Navy, Royal, 36
Carbonero (submarine), 54
caustic soda, 7
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 60
Central Powers submarine operations,
14–21
Centrimetric radar, 37
Cheeney, William, 5–6
Chinese submarines, 49, 57–59
CIA, 60
Closed-cycle machinery, 42, 44–46
Cold War, 39–61
British submarines, 42–43, 45
inﬂuence of German WWII submarines
on submarine design, 39–40
Soviet bloc submarine operations, 51–52
Soviet submarines, 41–42, 55–58
submarine crewing systems, 59, 61
United States submarines, 46–49,
54–56, 59
Western submarine operations, 49–51
Compressed-air engines, 3, 8
Conqueror (submarine), 50
Convoying of shipping
Germany in WWI, 12
Germany in WWII, 31–32
Great Britain in WWI, 18, 21
Great Britain in WWII, 35
Japan in WWII, 33–34
U.S. in WWII, 36
Cressy (armored cruiser), 14–15
Crimean War, 2–3
Curie (submarine), 13I N D E X 441

Cusk (submarine), 54
Cussler, Clive, 5
D class submarines (British), 9–10
D-4 launch system, 56
Davids (semi-submersible spar torpedo
boats), 5
Daylight submerged attacks, 38
De Gaulle, Charles, 49, 58
De Villeroi, Brutus, 4
Deck guns, 23, 25–26
Decryption of German codes, WWII, 37
Delﬁn (submarine), 3
Delta class submarines, 57, 60
Depth control techniques, early, 8
D’Equevilley-Montjustin, Raimondo
Lorenzo, 8, 10
Diable Marin (submarine), 2
Diesel. See under Propulsion
Distant blockade, 14–15, 19
Dönitz, Karl, 34–36
Dora Hugo Stennes (liner), 12
Dreadnought (submarine), 49
Drebbel, Cornelius, 1
Drop-collar torpedo launch system, 3
Drzewiecki, Stefan K., 3
Dynamite gun, 6
E-1 (submarine), 12
E-8 (submarine), 12
E-9 (submarine), 12
Eagle (British 64-gun ship), 3–4
Echo I class submarines, 55, 59
Echo II class submarines, 48
Electric Boat Company, 7
Electric motors, 8, 23, 39
Elektroboote (submarine), 27, 37, 39–40,
46
Engines. See Propulsion
Excalibur (submarine), 42, 45
Explorer (submarine), 42, 45
Export of submarines, ix–x, 1–11, 43–44
Falklands/Malvinas (1982), 50
Fenian Brotherhood, 6
Fenian Ram (submarine), 6
First Schleswig War, 2
Fleet submarines, 10, 24–25, 50
Forelle (submarine), 10
Foxtrot class submarines, 42
French submarines
assault on the Dardanelles, 13
crewing system, 61
distant blockade in WWI, 19
early models, 8–9
minelaying submarines, 29
nuclear-powered ballistic missile
submarines, 49
nuclear-powered submarines, 58
strategic missile submarines, 57–58
in World War I, 11, 13, 19
in World War II, 29–30
Fuel cells, 46
Fulton, Robert, 4
Garrett, George W., ix, 9
Gato (submarine), 60
Gato class submarines, 25, 41
General Belgrano (cruiser), 50
General Steuben (liner), 32
George Washington (submarine), 56
German submarines
acoustic torpedoes, 37
antiaircraft weapons increased, 27
Black Sea operations, WWI, 21
campaign against merchant shipping,
WWI, 15–22
campaign against merchant shipping,
WWII, 34–36
“counterblockade,” WWI, 15
early models, 10–11
electric motors, 39
Flanders operations, WWI, 11, 17
heavy antiaircraft batteries, 37
High Seas Fleet, WWI, 12, 15, 17
inﬂuence on Cold War designs,
39–40
inﬂuence on other designs after WWI,
24–26
leading up to World War II, 24–28442 I N D E X

Mediterranean operations, WWI, 17,
19–21
radar warning receivers, 37
snorkels, 37
wolf-pack tactics, 34–35
in World War I, 10–11,
14–21
in World War II, 34–38
Gern, Konstantin Borisov, 3
Glomar Explorer (salvage submarine),
60
Golf class submarines, 55, 60
Goubet, Claude 8
Goya (liner), 32
Grayback class submarines, 54
GUPPY program, 40–41, 50
Gymnôte (submarine), 8
Halibut (submarine), 54
Halligan, John, 6
Han class submarines, 61
Hersing, Otto, 19
Hesperian (liner), 16
High Seas Fleet, 12, 15, 17
High-frequency direction ﬁnding, 37
Hitler, Adolf, 35
H.L. Hunley (submarine), 5
Hogue (armored cruiser), 14–15
Holland (submarines), 6–7
Holland, John P., ix, 6–9, 30
Hollweg, Bethmann, 16
Horton, Max, 12
Hotel class submarines, 55, 60
Housatonic (steam sloop), 5
Hull designs, 9, 41, 43, 48
Hunter-killer tactics, 40, 48, 50
Huntley, Horace L., 5
I-19 (submarine ), 38
Indian submarines, 49
Ingenieurskantoor voor Scheepsbouw (IvS),
24
Intelligent Whale (submarine), 5, 6
Iron submersible, 2
Italian submarines, 11, 28–29, 35–38
J class submarines (British), 10
James Madison (submarine), 56
Japanese submarines, 25–26, 38
Jean Bart (dreadnought battleship), 19
JL-1 ballistic missiles, 59
JL-2 ballistic missiles, 59
John P. Holland Torpedo Boat Company,
6–7
Juliett class submarines, 42
Junsen type submarines, 24, 26
Jupiter missiles, 56
K class submarines (British), 10
K-122 (submarine), 59
K-129 (submarine), 60
K-19 (submarine), 60
K-27 (submarine), 48
K-3 (submarine), 47
Kaidai type submarines, 24, 26
Kilo class submarines, 43
Kleinkrieg, 14
Kockums AIP system, 45
Kriegsmarine, 31
Kroehl, Julius, 4
Krupp’s Germania shipyard, 8, 10, 24
“K”-type long-range submarines (Soviet), 30
L-55 (submarine), 30
Lake, Simon, 7–8, 10
Laubeuf, Maxime, ix, 9
Laurence, Noel, 12
Laurenti, Cesare, ix, 11
Lead-bismuth reactors, 48
Lee, Ezra, 3–4
Leon Gambetta (armored cruiser), 19
Liquid sodium reactors, 47
Loon missiles, 54
Los Angeles class submarines, 49
“L”-type minelaying submarines (Soviet), 30
Lusitania (liner), 16
M1 ballistic missile system, 58
M4 ballistic missiles, 58
Majestic (pre-dreadnought battleship), 19
Market for submarines, ix–x, 1–11, 43–44I N D E X 443

McClintock, James R., 5
Medusa (submarine), 19–20
MESMA (Module d’Energie Sous-Marine
Autonome), 45
Messudiyeh (coast defense ship), 13
Meteorite (submarine), 45
Midget submarines, 26, 28
Minelaying submarines, 11, 28, 29, 30
Mines, 14–15, 28, 32, 33, 34
MIRVs, 56, 58, 59
Missiles. See Armaments; Ballistic missile
submarines; speciﬁc missile names
Mittel-U type submarines, 10–11
Mobilization type submarines,
10–11
Motors. See Propulsion
“M”-type coastal submarines, 30
Multiple Independently Targeted Re-entry
Vehicles (MIRVs), 56, 58, 59
Narval (submarine), 9
Nautilus (submarine, 1800), 4
Nautilus (submarine, 1954), 47
Nautilus Submarine Boat Company, 6
Nebraskan (liner), 16
Nerpa (submarine), 13
Neutrality Zone, WWII, 36
Nikonov, Yeﬁm, 1
Nordenfeldt, Thorsten, ix, 9, 10
Nordenfelt I (submarine), 9
Nordenfelt IV (submarine), 9–10
North Carolina (battleship), 38
North Korean submarines, 42
November class submarines, 47
Nuclear missiles, 54–59
Nuclear submarines, x, 40–41, 46–49
lead bismuth reactors, 48
liquid sodium reactors, 47
pressurized water reactors, 47
See also speciﬁc submarine names
O’Brien (destroyer), 38
Octorara (gunboat), 6
Ohio class submarines, 57
P-20 missiles, 55
Paciﬁc Fleet, U.S., 33
Paciﬁc Pearl Company, 4
Peacemaker (submarine), 7
Pearl oyster beds, 4
Peenemünde, Germany, 53–54
Pegram, George, 46
Pike type coastal submarines, 30
Pioneer I & II (submarines), 5
Plongeur (submarine), 8
Plunger (submarine), 6–7
Polaris ballistic missiles, 54, 56, 57
Porpoise class submarines, 25
Poseidon missiles, 56
Pressurized water reactors, 47
Prinz Adalbert (armored cruiser), 12
Prize Regulations of the Declaration of
London of 1909, 15, 17, 31, 35
Project 611 (Zulu) class long-range
submarines, 41, 55
Project 611A (Zulu-IV) class submarines,
55
Project 611AB (Zulu-V) class submarines,
55, 56, 60
Project 613 (Whiskey) class coastal
submarines, 55
Project 613 (Whiskey) class medium
submarines, 41
Project 615 (Quebec) class coastal
submarines, 41
Project 624 class cruise missile
submarines, 55
Project 627 (November) class submarines,
47
Project 627A class submarines, 55
Project 629 (Golf) class submarines, 55, 60
Project 629A class submarines, 56
Project 633 (Romeo) class submarines, 42
Project 636 (Kilo) class submarines, 43
Project 641 (Foxtrot) class submarines, 42
Project 641BUKI (Tango) class
submarines, 42
Project 644 (Whiskey Twin-Cylinder) class
submarines, 55
Project 651 (Juliett) class submarines, 42
Project 653 class submarines, 55444 I N D E X

Project 658 (Hotel) class submarines, 55,
60
Project 658M class submarines, 56
Project 659 (Echo I) class submarines, 55,
59
Project 665 (Whiskey Long-Bin) class
submarines, 55
Project 667A (Yankee) class submarines,
57, 60
Project 667B (Delta) class submarines, 57,
60
Project 670 (Alfa) class submarines, 48
Project 671 (Victor) class submarines, 48
Project 675 (Echo II) class submarines, 48
Project 705 (Alfa) class submarines, 48
Project 877 (Kilo) class submarines, 43
Project 941 (Typhoon) class submarines,
57, 61
Project 971 (Akula) class submarines, 49
Project P-2 boat, 54
Propellers, 41, 43
hand-cranked, 4, 5, 9
swiveling, 7
Propulsion
air-independent (AIP), 44–46
batteries, 7, 8, 23
closed-cycle machinery, 42, 44–46
compressed-air engines, 3, 8
diesel engines, 9, 23
diesel-electric direct drive, 25, 40, 55
diesel-electric reduction drive, 25
electric motors, 8, 23, 39
fuel cells, 46
gasoline engines, 6, 10
gasoline explosion hazards, 9
hydrogen peroxide breakdown and,
44–46
Kockums AIP system, 45
man-powered, 3
nuclear-powered. See Nuclear
submarines
propellers. See Propellers
Rankine-cycle turbo alternator, 45
snorkels, 27, 37, 39–40
steam engines, 3, 9
steam turbines, 10
steam via caustic soda, 7
Stirling engines, 45
treadmills, 2
turbo-electric drive, 49
Walter closed-cycle turbine system, 42,
44–46, 54
Pustkuchen, Oberleutnant zur See, 17
Quebec class submarines, 41
R class submarines (British), 10, 14
R-1 ballistic missiles, 54
R-11 ballistic missiles (Scuds), 55
R-13 ballistic missiles, 55
R-21 ballistic missiles (Sarks), 56
R-39 ballistic missiles (Sturgeons), 57
Radar, 25–26, 33, 34, 38
centrimetric, 37
warning receivers, 37
Rankine-cycle turbo alternator, 45
Rédoutable class submarines, 29, 58
Regulus nuclear cruise missiles, 54, 59
Requin class submarines, 24
Resolution class submarines, 57–58
Resurgam (submarine), 9
Resurgam III (submarine), 9
Richson, Carl, 11
Rickover, Hyman G., 47
Romazzotti, Gaston, 8
Romeo class submarines, 42
Russian submarines, 1–3, 12, 13
Russo-Turkish War of 1877, 3
S class submarines (British), 28, 42
S-148 (destroyer), 12
Sark missiles, 56
Scheer, Reinhard, 17
Schweiger, Walter, 16
Scorpion class nuclear attack submarines,
56
Scud missiles, 55
Seawolf (submarine), 47
Sen-toku type submarines, 26
“Shch”-type coastal submarines, 30I N D E X 445

Shilder, Karl Andreyevich, 2
Signals intelligence, 33
Skipjack class attack submarines, 56
Snorkels, 27, 37, 39–40
Sonar, 38, 50
Sound of Music (ﬁlm), 19
Soviet submarines
antiship cruise missiles, 42
antisubmarine operations, 43
ballistic missile submarines, 55–57
campaign against merchant shipping,
WWII, 32
during the Cold War, 41–42, 55–58
cruise missile submarines, 55–57
D-4 launch system, 56
nuclear-powered submarines, 41–42,
46–49, 55–57
Strategic Rocket Forces, 55, 57
transition to full submarines, 41–42
in World War II, 30–32
See also Russian submarines
St. Patrick (submarine), 6
Standardization of submarines, 25
Steam engines, 3, 9
Stirling engines, 45
Strategic Rocket Forces, 55, 57
Sturgeon class submarines, 48
Sturgeon missiles, 57
“S”-type oceangoing submarines (Soviet),
30
Sub Marine Explorer (submarine), 4
Submarine design
acoustic and magnetic signatures
reduced, 43
batteries, early, 7, 8
batteries, modern, 43
Britain and, ix, 9–10, 27–28, 57–58
China and, 49, 57–59
double-hulled ships, 9
early models, 1–11
ﬁrst underwater vessel, 1
France and, ix, 8–9, 29–30, 58
Germany and, ix–x, 10–11, 23–24,
26–27, 43–44
by individual innovators, 1–11
Italy and, ix–x, 11, 28–29
Japan and, 25–26
minelaying submarines, 11, 28, 29, 30
nuclear-powered submarines. See
Nuclear submarines
propulsion. See Propulsion
Russia and, x, 1–3
Soviet Union and, 30–31, 41–43, 47–49,
55–58
standardization, 25
submarines as missile launch platforms,
50–61
Sweden and, x, 11
teardrop-shaped hull, 41, 43, 48
“true” submarines, 39–49
United States and, ix–x, 3–4, 25, 40–41,
47–49, 54–56
World War II models, 23–31
X-tail, 41
Sudanese factory, missile launch against,
51
Surcouf class submarines, 29–30
Sussex (cross-Channel steamer), 17
Swedish submarines, x, 11
Swordﬁsh class (“S” type) submarines
(British), 28
Swordﬁsh class (“S” type) submarines
(British), 42
T class submarines (British), 28, 42
Tactics
antisubmarine warfare, 50
“bastion defense,” 52, 61
daylight submerged attacks, 38
deploying forward, 50
distant blockade, 14–15
German “counterblockade,” WWI, 15
hunter-killer, 40, 48, 50
intercepting and shadowing carrier
forces, 51
intercepting and shadowing other
submarines, 51–52
kleinkrieg, 14–15
mining, WWI, 14–15
wolf-pack, 34–35446 I N D E X

in World War II, 23
yogeki zengen sakusen (ambush-attrition
operation), 38
Tail, X, 41
Tang class submarines, 40
Tango class submarines, 42
Techel, Hans, 10, 24
Tench class submarines, 25
Tench class submarines retroﬁts, 41
Thresher class submarines, 48
TK-208 (submarine), 57
Tomahawk missiles, 51
Torpedoes
acoustic torpedoes, 37
antiescort homing torpedoes, 38
drop collar torpedo launch, 3
self-propelled torpedoes, 3, 9
torpedo problems, WWII, 38
torpedo tubes, 23
wakeless electronic torpedoes, 38
Trade, submarine market, ix–x, 1–11, 43–44
Treaty of Versailles, ix–x, 24, 26
Trident missiles, 57, 58
Triton class (“T” type) submarines, 28, 42
Triumph (pre-dreadnought battleship), 19
“True” submarines, 39–49
Tuck, Josiah H.L., 7
Tunny (submarine), 54
Turbo-electric drive, 49
Turtle (submarine), 3–4
Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea
(Verne), 4
Type 035 class submarines, 58
Type 091 (Han) class submarines, 58
Type 092 (Xia) class ballistic missile
submarines, 58–59, 61
Type 094 class submarines, 59
Type 209 submarines, 44
Type IA long-range submarines, 24
Type IIA coastal submarines, 24
Type IX long-range submarines, 27
Type VII oceangoing submarines, 24, 27
Type VIIC oceangoing submarines, 27
Type X minelayers submarines, 27
Type XIC oceangoing submarines, 27
Type XIV supply submarines, 27
Type XVII submarines, 44–46
Type XXI submarines (elektroboote), 27, 37,
39–40, 46, 49
Type XXIII submarines, 27
Typhoon class submarines, 57, 61
U class submarines (British), 28
U-1 (submarine), 26–27
U-12 (submarine), 19
U-20 (submarine), 16
U-21 (submarine), 19
U-5 (submarine), 19
U-9 (submarine), 14–15
UB-14 (submarine), 19
UB-15 (submarine), 19
UB-29 (submarine), 17
UB-I type submarines, 11
UB-III type submarines, 11
U-boats. See German submarines; speciﬁc
name, such as U-1, UB-29, etc.; speciﬁc
type, such as UB-I, UB-III, etc.
UB-type coastal submarines, 21
UC type coastal minelaying submarines, 11,
21
U-cruiser submarines, 11, 24
Undine (light cruiser), 12
United States submarines
ballistic missile submarines, 56
Blue and Gold crews, 59
campaign against merchant shipping,
WWII, 33–34
in the Civil War, 4–6
during the Cold War, 46–51, 54–56, 59
early models, 3–8
ﬂeet submarines, 24–25
GUPPY program, 40–41, 50
habitability, 38
nuclear-powered submarines, 40, 46–49
Paciﬁc Fleet in WWII, 33
radar and, 34
in the Revolutionary War, 3–4
standardization, 25
transition to “true” submarines, 39–41
in the War of 1812, 4I N D E X 447

wolf-pack tactics, 34
in World War II, 25–26, 31, 33–34
Unterseebootkonstruktionsbüro, 10
V class submarines (British), 28
V-1 missiles, 54
V-2 ballistic missiles, 53–54
Valiant class submarines, 58
Veinticinco de Mayo (carrier), 50
Verne, Jules, 4
Victor class submarines, 48
Von der Tann (battlecruiser), 12
Von Heimburg, Heino, 19–20
Von Holtzendorff, Henning, 17, 18
Von Preussen, Heinrich, 12
Von Trapp, Georg Ritter, 19
Walter, Helmuth, 44–45
Walter closed-cycle turbine system, 42,
44–46, 54
War of 1812, 4
Wasp (aircraft carrier), 38
Weapons. See Armaments
Weddigen, Otto, 14–15
Whiskey class submarines, 41, 55
Whiskey Long-Bin class submarines, 55
Whiskey Twin-Cylinder class submarines,
55
Wilhelm Gustloff (liner), 32
Wilson, Woodrow, U.S. President, 16, 18
Wolf-pack tactics, 34–35
World War I, 11–21
Allied antisubmarine operations, 13–14,
16
Allied submarine operations, 11–14
British distant blockade, 14
British submarines, 9–12
convoying of shipping, 12, 18, 21
Flanders operations, 11, 17
French distant blockade, 19
French submarines, 11, 13, 19
German Black Sea operations, 21
German campaign against merchant
shipping, 15–22
German “counterblockade,” 15
German submarines, 10–11, 14–21
High Seas Fleet, 12, 15, 17
Mediterranean operations, German, 17,
19–21
mining, 14–15
World War II, 22–38
Allied antisubmarine operations, 27, 37
Allied campaign against merchant
shipping, 31–33
Allied submarine operations, 31–34
Axis antisubmarine operations, 33
Axis submarine operations, 34–38
British submarines, 27–28, 31–33
convoying of shipping, 31–36
decryption of German codes, 37
French submarines, 29–30
German campaign against merchant
shipping, 34–36
German submarines, 24–28,
34–38
Neutrality Zone, 36
Soviet campaign against merchant
shipping, 32
Soviet submarines, 30–32
torpedo problems, 38
United States campaign against
merchant shipping, 33–34
United States Paciﬁc Fleet, 33
United States submarines, 25–26, 31,
33–34
Xia class submarines, 58–59, 61
X-tail, 41
Yankee class submarines, 57, 60
Yogeki zengen sakusen (ambush-attrition
operation), 38
Zalinsky, Edmund L., 6
Zédé, Gustave, 8
Zimmerman Telegram, 18
Zulu class submarines, 41, 55
Zulu-IV class submarines, 55
Zulu-V class submarines, 55, 56, 60A B O U T T H E A U T H O R

PAUL E. FONTENOY, Ph.D., is curator of maritime research and technology
at the North Carolina Maritime Museum in Beaufort, NC, and a visiting
assistant professor in the maritime studies program at East Carolina Uni-
versity, Greenville, NC. His published works include The Sloops of the Hud-
son River, Aircraft Carriers: An Illustrated History of Their Impact, and more
than 100 articles on naval and maritime history topics.